Academic Writing
3
201
Introduction to Academic Writing
An introduction to academic writing and to the genres of narrative, critical, and essay writing. Emphasis on developing an effective writing process, reading critically, developing arguments, and using and citing sources. Some emphasis on oral presentations may be included.
203
Introduction to Research Writing
An introduction to inquiry-based research writing, from formulating good research questions to conducting an information search, developing an argument, using sources effectively, and revising and editing. A focus on oral presentations may also be included.
303
Discipline-based Academic Writing
An intermediate level course in the writing styles, genres and modes of evidence and reasoning appropriate to academic writing in a specific discipline or disciplines. Emphasis on connections between reading, writing, critical reasoning and, where appropriate, other discourse forms such as oral and electronic presentation.
Accounting
30
217
Introductory Financial Accounting
Introduction to accounting for business organizations. Reporting of financial results of operations and financial position to investors, managers, and others. Emphasis on the use of accounting information for decision making.
301
Accounting Principles
Introduction to basic accounting principles and practices. Emphasis is placed on the accounting cycle and the key financial statements necessary for business decisions. Introduces basic financial and managerial accounting concepts.
323
Introductory Managerial Accounting
An introduction to the use of accounting within an organizational context. Emphasis is placed on the development and dissemination of accounting information necessary for effective management including: planning, directing, motivating, and controlling activities and behaviours.
341
Intermediate Financial Accounting I
Financial accounting from a producer point of view. Topics include cash, receivables, inventories, short and long-term investments, intangible assets and capital assets including the appropriate financial statement considerations.
343
Intermediate Financial Accounting II
Financial accounting from a producer point of view. Topics include accounting for liabilities, shareholders equity, leases, future income taxes, pensions, accounting changes and earnings per share including the relevant financial statement considerations.
361
Cost Accounting
The production of accounting data for the purpose of decision-making, control and evaluation. Topics covered are in the cost classifications and methods of cost establishment, cost data appropriate for decision models, standards and controls.
421
Taxation
Taxation levied on profits, sales, property and estates and its impact upon management decisions. Consideration will be given to the biases and shifts implicit in any system of taxation.
423
Advanced Taxation
Focuses on tax planning. Extends the material covered in the introductory tax course with an examination of specialized topics in personal and corporate income tax. Topics include detailed review of taxation of corporations, income trusts, partnerships, business reorganization, amalgamations, winding-up of businesses, sale of an incorporated business, tax consequences of leaving Canada and death of a taxpayer.
425
Auditing
A conceptual study of audit evidence, basic audit techniques, professional ethics, audit reports.
443
Advanced Financial Accounting
Topics include accounting for business combinations and intercorporate investments, foreign currency transactions and translation, bankruptcy, partnerships, and not-for-profit organizations.
445
Accounting Theory
Examines the origins of financial accounting and current theories on the use of financial accounting information by investors, regulators, standard setters, and other corporate stakeholders.
465
Managerial Control Systems
Case approach to Management Control Systems explaining the use of accounting data from a managerial perspective. Emphasis is placed on how managers use planning and control to accomplish a firm's strategies.
559
Selected Topics in Accounting
Investigation of selected topics in Accounting.
601
Introductory Financial Accounting
Introduction to accounting for business organizations. Reporting of financial results of operations and financial position to investors, managers, and others. Emphasis on the use of accounting information for decision-making.
603
Management Accounting
Breakeven analysis, activity-based costing and management, budgeting, productivity measures, and other tools and techniques that are part of a planning and control system that will help the manager make better economic decisions.
641
Intermediate Financial Accounting I
Provides detailed coverage of the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) primarily related to assets. Emphasizes the theory behind the methods, the strengths and weaknesses of such methods and the need for sound professional judgment.
643
Intermediate Financial Accounting II
Builds on Intermediate Financial Accounting I with coverage of the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) primarily related to liabilities and owners' equity. Emphasizes the theory behind the methods, the strengths and weaknesses of methods and the need for sound professional judgment.
661
Cost Accounting
Provides intermediate level discussions to the production and analysis of costs used for pricing, production and investment decisions, revenue analysis, performance evaluation, management incentive systems and strategy analysis.
672
Financial Accounting Concepts
Introduction to accounting for business organizations emphasizing the use and analysis of financial statements for decision-making purposes.
674
Managerial Accounting Concepts
Introduction to the use of accounting within an organizational context.  Emphasis is placed on the development and dissemination of accounting information necessary for effective management.
721
Taxation
Discusses the core concepts, regulations, and interpretations underlying the Canadian individual and corporate income taxation. Emphasis is on who is taxable, on what income, when and how tax is calculated. Tax planning opportunities will be identified by using long-term and clientele-based techniques.
723
Advanced Taxation
Focuses on tax planning. It extends the material covered in the introductory tax course with an examination of specialized topics in personal and corporate income tax.
725
Auditing
Discusses the techniques and theory behind the external auditor's provision of assurance services on financial information. Topics include: the demand for assurance, the role of auditors in providing assurance, auditor independence, audit reports, and audit liability.
741
Financial Statement Analysis
Covers the theories, concepts and practices of financial statement analysis with an emphasis placed on applications.
743
Advanced Financial Accounting
Focuses on advanced accounting methods related to inter-corporate investments and financial reporting. Topics include accounting for business combinations and inter-corporate investments, foreign currency transactions and translation, bankruptcy, partnerships, and not-for-profit organizations.
745
Accounting Theory
Examines the conceptual framework underlying the preparation of financial accounting information, and the theories and propositions on the use of such information by investors, regulators, standard setters, and other corporate stakeholders.
765
Managerial Control Systems
Emphasis is placed on how managers use planning and control to accomplish a firm's strategies. Uses a case approach to management control systems explaining the usefulness of accounting data from a managerial perspective.
789
Seminar in Accounting
Development of and solutions to current issues and problems in accounting.
797
Advanced Seminar in Accounting
Advanced accounting research topics.
799
Doctoral Seminars in Accounting

Actuarial Science
22
325
Theory of Interest/Mathematics of Finance
Measurement of interest, elementary annuities, general annuities, amortization schedules and sinking funds, bonds and other securities.
327
Life Contingencies I
The survival function, force of mortality, life tables, analytical laws of mortality, life insurance, continuous and discrete life annuities, recursion equations. Introduction to benefit premiums and/or insurance and annuity models with interest as a random variable as time permits.
425
Intermediate Topics in Finance and Investment
Selected topics relevant to students with an interest in actuarial science, enterprise risk management, financial mathematics, etc. Topics include financial instruments; sources and cost of capital; portfolio selection; CAPM and alternatives; dividend policy; taxation; basic option pricing theory; stock valuation; measurement and assessment of financial performance; risk management.
427
Life Contingencies II
Benefit premiums, premium principles, fully continuous and fully discrete premiums. Benefit reserves and their analysis. Insurance models including expenses. Multiple-state models.
437
Actuarial Models
Basic distributional quantities; characteristics of actuarial models; continuous models; Basic and advanced discrete distributions; frequency and severity with coverage modifications (deductibles, policy limits, coinsurance); aggregate loss models.
511
Generalized Linear Models for Actuaries
Description of insurance data, response distributions, exponential family responses and estimation, GLMs, models for count data, categorical and continuous responses. Applications include: personal injury insurance, vehicle insurance, diabetes deaths, third party claims, and degree of vehicle crash. Software for fitting GLMs will be discussed.
513
Fundamentals of Actuarial Practice
An introduction to the foundations of actuarial science including the history and development of insurance, the actuarial profession, and the professional societies. Standards of practice and codes of ethics and conduct. An examination of the contexts and environments (including the legal, political, and societal) in which actuarial work takes place. Foundational skills required by actuaries, with an emphasis on communication.
515
Models for Financial Economics
Survey of financial derivatives, valuation of derivatives using binomial trees, Black-Scholes-Merton equation, dynamic hedging, Brownian motion and Ito’s Lemma.
517
Estimating Unpaid Claims in General Insurance
Data collection, adjusting premiums, trending losses, development triangles, expected method, frequency-severity method, Bornhuetter Ferguson method, Benktander method, Cape Cod method, impact of changing conditions on projection method.
519
Quantitative Financial Risk Management
Risk measures, correlations and copulas, various approaches to modelling market and credit risk, liquidity risk, enterprise risk management.
527
Life Contingencies III

531
Loss Distributions and Their Estimations
Review of mathematical statistics; estimation based on complete and modified data; frequentist estimation; Bayesian estimation; simulation in actuarial modelling; model selection.
535
Mathematics of Demography
Conventional and adjusted measures of mortality; measures of fertility; measures of morbidity; North American demographic characteristics and trends; evaluation of demographic data; projections for stable and stationary populations; actuarial applications of demographic characteristics and trends.
537
Credibility Theory
Limited fluctuation credibility; full and partial credibility; greatest accuracy credibility; Bayesian methodology; credibility premium; Buhlmann model; Buhlmann-Straub model; empirical Bayes method; bonus-malus system.
539
Special Topics in Actuarial Science
Offered under various subtitles.
600
Research Seminar
A professional skills course, focusing on the development of technical proficiencies that are essential for students to succeed in their future careers. The emphasis is on delivering professional presentations and using modern actuarial techniques and statistical research tools. Ethics and professionalism are also covered.
611
Generalized Linear Models for Actuaries
Description of insurance data, response distributions, exponential family responses and estimation, GLMs, models for count data, categorical and continuous responses. Applications include: personal injury insurance, vehicle insurance, diabetes deaths, third party claims, and degree of vehicle crash. Software for fitting GLMs will be discussed.
617
Estimating Unpaid Claims in General Insurance
Data collection, adjusting premiums, trending losses, development triangles, expected method, frequency-severity method, Bornhuetter Ferguson method, Benktander method, Cape Cod method, impact of changing conditions on projection method.
619
Quantitative Financial Risk Management
Risk measures, correlations and copulas, various approaches to modelling market and credit risk, liquidity risk, enterprise risk management.
627
Advanced Life Contingencies
Multiple life functions, dependent and independent models, related annuities and insurances. Multiple decrement models: time until and causes of death. Associated single decrement tables. Applications of  multiple decrement theory. Asset shares. Business and regulatory considerations.
637
Credibility Theory
Limited fluctuation credibility; full and partial credibility; greatest accuracy credibility; Bayesian methodology; credibility premium; Buhlmann model; Buhlmann-Straub model; empirical Bayes method; bonus-malus system.
639
Conference Course in Actuarial Modelling
Topics in advanced actuarial theory and practice, such as: insurance risk models; practical analysis of extreme values; advanced property and casualty rate making; actuarial aspects of financial theory.
African Studies
3
301
Introduction to African Studies
An interdisciplinary perspective on the people and ecologies of the African continent. The major theme will be the processes and effects of social, religious, political, economic, historical and cultural change on the lives of Africans.
400
Field Study in Africa
A field course for interdisciplinary study of a country or region of Africa, emphasizing the geographical, archaeological, historical, cultural, political, economic and artistic aspects.
501
Seminar
Study of a particular topic(s) or region(s) from an interdisciplinary and comparative perspective. Students will be required to examine how political, social, economic and cultural factors intersect to shape various issues in the African setting.
American Sign Language
2
201
Beginners' American Sign Language I
Introduction to American Sign Language (ASL) and the culture of deaf people. Covers material in matriculation-level ASL. It teaches basic communication and conversational skills in ASL and is for students with no background in ASL.
203
Beginners' American Sign Language II

Anthropology
63
201
Introduction to Biological Anthropology
Introduction to the major fields of biological anthropology including evolutionary theory and processes, human paleontology, primatology, genetics, osteology, human adaptation, development, and variation, with special emphasis on the path of human evolution.
203
Introduction to Social and Cultural Anthropology
The nature of human society: its elements, its variability and its perpetuation. Comparisons of institutions (political, economic, religious, educational and sexual) in both small-scale and large-scale societies.
303
Business in Cultural Context
Ways in which differences in cultural values and practices affect the form and nature of interaction between business parties, especially those of differing national/cultural/ethnic backgrounds.
305
Human Variation and Adaptation
Some of the major problems involved in interpreting modern and recent human diversity. Emphasis on the interaction between human cultural and biological systems and on cultural influences upon human biological diversity.
309
Human Evolution
Investigation of the major phases of human evolution, with an emphasis on understanding how, when and why specific adaptations evolved. In laboratories, students learn to reconstruct behaviour from anatomical and palaeontological evidence.
311
Primate Behaviour
Primate behaviour and related topics, including social dynamics, sociobiology, socio-ecology, dominance, aggression, kinship, sexual behaviour, socialization, learning, cognition, communication, ape language, and conservation.
313
Anthropology of the Environment
Cross-cultural perspectives on human-environment relationships and application to contemporary problems concerning conservation, resource management and environmentalism.
317
Ethnographic Survey of Africa South of the Sahara
Traditional societies in sub-Saharan Africa, concentrating on a number of classical social anthropological field work studies.
319
Ethnographic Survey of North Africa
Ethnographic survey of the peoples of North Africa, including the Sahara, and historical analysis of their incorporation within the contemporary nation states of the region.
321
Ethnographic Survey of Latin America
A survey of cultural traditions of Mexico, the Caribbean, and Central and South America as they have evolved since the sixteenth century.
323
Culture and Society of China
Diversity of social and cultural patterns in imperial and contemporary times.
329
Topics in Ethnographic Survey of Selected World Areas
Selected topics in the anthropology of world areas.
331
Sex and Gender
Cross-species and cross-cultural perspective on sex and gender.
341
Medical Anthropology
A survey of anthropological approaches to disease, illness and the maintenance of health.
343
Militarism and Militarization
Comparative global ethnographic survey of militarization processes. Examples will be drawn from contemporary and historical societies, with a particular emphasis on the wide variety of institutions and communities necessary to the production of violence, and on their relationship to the larger society.
346
Development of Indigenous-Settler Relations in Canada
An exploration of Indigenous-Settler relations in Canada from first contact to present, including the development of Indian policy, the Indian Act, treaties, residential schools, and Sixties Scoop.
350
Laboratory Practice in Biological Anthropology
Examines the basic concepts and methods of biological anthropology using an experiential learning model. Coverage includes genetics, osteology, primatology, paleoanthropology, and human biology with a strong emphasis on the role of evolutionary theory throughout.
355
Ethnographic Survey of Canada's Indigenous Peoples
A critical overview of the historical, social, political, economic, environmental, and cultural contexts related to health, justice, education, gender, traditional practices, and identity of Indigenous Peoples, Nations, cultures, and organizations across Canada.
357
Anthropology of Development
Cultural dimensions of local and international development policy, programming, and evaluation.
361
History of Anthropology
Historical survey of anthropological thought from the enlightenment to the present.
363
Magic, Witchcraft, and Gods: Anthropology of Religion
Contemporary anthropological theoretical perspectives on topics such as divination, ritual, witchcraft, magic and symbolism in both indigenous and world religions. The relationship of religion to healing, gender and power is also examined.
371
Political Anthropology
Comparative analysis of power, authority, dependency relations, and processes of governance, from the perspective of social and cultural anthropology.
379
Urban Anthropology
A study of tribalism, ethnicity, sub-cultures, social networks and related phenomena in urban societies. Attention will be paid to planning and applied urban anthropology.
385
Economic Anthropology
Comparative analysis of production, distribution and consumption in local and globalized contexts. Examines theories of exchange, the effects of capitalism, and the relation between economy and culture.
393
Anthropology of Global Systems
Investigates the complex relationship between the global and the local by examining the social, cultural, economic, and political changes in specific localities as a result of the global rise of capitalism.
395
Anthropology of Science
An introduction to the culture and the politics of science. Examines conceptual and daily practices in the laboratory, the scientific method, the training of scientists, the work of scientific collaboration and the intersection between scientists and wider political, racial, gendered and religious issues. Special consideration will be given to the anthropology of scientific controversy.
399
Topics in Anthropology

400
Independent Study
Selected topics in anthropology may be offered for Majors and Honours students.
410
Contemporary Indigenous Affairs in Canada
Investigation of current issues concerning Canada’s Indigenous peoples, including land claims, self-government, Indigenous rights, health, education, housing, employment and other social issues.
411
Methods and Analysis for Anthropology
An introduction to research design, data collection, and analysis as used in anthropology. Cross-cultural research design and methods, use of participant observation and personal documents will be emphasized.
412
The Primate Fossil Record
A review of the evolution of the primates, covering the morphological and taxonomic diversity of fossil primates, environmental and chronological context for primate evolution, and current debates and problems in the field of primate evolution. In class laboratories focus on the diversity of primate dietary, locomotor, and social adaptations, and how these are inferred from the fossil record.
413
Methods in Primatology
Focus on observational methods and analysis, with practical application in laboratory study at the Calgary Zoo.
421
Contemporary Latin American Society
An examination of selected issues in the anthropological study of contemporary Latin America.
425
Primate Cognition
Causes and consequences of primate sociality, such as brain structure and evolution, kin recognition, Theory of Mind, social perception and awareness, and similarities and differences in communication and cognition between human and non-human primates.
427
Women in East Asian Societies
Comparison of women's roles in China, Japan, and Korea, with particular reference to family structure and economic organization.
435
Evolution of Human Behaviour
Analysis of evolutionary principles and processes (such as natural selection, sexual selection, kin selection, parental investment) as they are applied to the current study of human and non-human primate behaviour. Special emphasis on socioecological approaches to primate behaviour.
441
Problems in the Anthropology of Health

449
Anthropology of HIV/AIDS
Examines the individual, clinical, epidemiological, cultural, social, psychological, political, economic, and public policy dimensions of HIV/AIDS along with its meaning and importance on a global level from an anthropological perspective.
451
Topics in Primate Behavioural Ecology and Conservation
Advanced topics in the behavioural ecology and conservation biology of non-human primates, including related theory and field techniques.
467
Soldiering: Perspectives on Military Life
An anthropological approach to soldiering in the aftermath of the Second World War. Questions the idea of a universal soldier, soldiers’ shifting relationship to the nation-state, the rise of privatized warfare and the creation of global military communities. Special attention will be paid to the rise of humanitarian military regimes, military occupation, new technologies of warfare and non-human soldiers.
479
Housing and Society

490
Anthropological Theory
Examination of the fundamentals of anthropological theory through key concepts in anthropology since the nineteenth century, such as race, history, society, function, structure, gender and representation.
501
Advanced Topics in Social and Cultural Anthropology
Arranged for various topics of anthropology on the basis of special interest and need.
505
Advanced Topics in Biological Anthropology
Arranged for various topics of biological anthropology on the basis of special interests and need.
506
Anthropological Genetics
Examines the principles of evolutionary genetics with a focus on applications to current topics in Anthropology such as behaviour, life history, adaptation, migration and disease. Explores the contents of the primate genome as well as human and non-human primate genetic variation in an evolutionary framework.
523
Human Ecology
Current directions in various subfields of human ecology as they apply to Anthropology, Archaeology, and Geography.
534
Biological Anthropology Perspectives on Health
The biocultural study of human health among contemporary and past populations via cross-cultural studies of health and healing, child growth and development, reproductive health, aging, infectious disease, immune function, and the impact of stress on physical and mental health.
541
Field Study in Social and Cultural Anthropology
Research projects carried out off campus under the supervision of a member of academic staff and resulting in a graded project report.
552
Field Studies: Topics in Primatology
Intensive training and practice in field methods of observational primate behaviour or behavioural ecology.
553
Primate Behavioural Research Design
Design of a research project, including the identification and operationalization of a research question and the collection and analysis of data.
571
Honours Seminar in Biological Anthropology

573
Honours Seminar in Social and Cultural Anthropology

589
Nutritional Anthropology
The study of human dietary practices from biological and cultural perspectives. Subjects covered include the development of nutritional anthropology, principles of nutrition, principles of ecology, diet from an evolutionary, comparative and historic perspective, the impact of undernutrition on human physiology, and behaviour and methods in nutritional anthropology.
601
Conference Course in Anthropology
A specialized area of Anthropology selected on the basis of particular interest and need.
603
Thesis Development
A reading and conference course in the student's substantive area conducted jointly by at least two faculty members.
605
Professional Skills for Anthropologists
Training and practice in research/teaching skills: grantsmanship, conference and classroom presentations, academic publishing, job interviews.
611
Methods in Anthropological Research
A variety of topics relevant to research and the logic of inquiry in Anthropology.
613
Current Issues in Methodology in Primatology
A variety of topics relating to aspects of data collection and data analysis in primatology, with a focus on ecological and behavioural data.
631
Anthropological Theory

635
Primatological Theory
Seminar dealing with the theoretical material of primatological and biobehavioural perspectives in Anthropology.
641
Seminar in Civil-Military Relations
Comparative analysis of relations between civil society and military institutions. A critical approach to analyzing how civil and military institutions mutually constitute each other, rather than taking the military and civilian sectors as a given. Special attention will be paid to twentieth-century militarization as a social process that has dramatically changed the shape of both civilian and military spheres.
659
Primatology
Specialized topics and laboratory training in this field will vary from year-to-year and may include: behavioural ecology, biomechanics, evolution, biosociality, and field methodology.
701
Independent Studies

Arabic Language and Muslim Cultures
16
202
Beginners Arabic I
A comprehensive course for students with no prior knowledge of the language. Includes training in listening, speaking, reading and writing of Modern Standard Arabic in its cultural context.
204
Beginners' Arabic II

301
Continuing Arabic I
A comprehensive course that includes further training in listening, speaking, reading and writing Modern Standard Arabic in its cultural context. Development of increased sophistication in language production and cultural understanding.
303
Continuing Arabic II

309
Arabic Culture in an Immersion Setting
Introduction to contemporary Arabic culture through research projects and life experience.
311
Modern Standard Arabic Language
Stresses oral skills and cultural understanding in an immersion setting. While the focus will be on speaking and aural comprehension, reading and writing will also be covered.
313
Reading Classical Arabic
An introduction to Arabic grammar and syntax through readings of classical sources.
317
Muslim Civilization I
Comparative study of Muslim civilization from Africa, the Arab and Persianate world, Asia and the West up to the end of the eighteenth century.
319
Muslim Civilization II
Comparative study of Muslim civilization from Africa, the Arab and Persianate world, Asia, and the West focusing on the developments of the nineteenth, twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
331
Intermediate Arabic I
A comprehensive course that increases the command of the structure of modern standard Arabic through reading materials; develops reading and writing skills and comprehension. Development of increased sophistication in language production and cultural understanding.
333
Intermediate Arabic II

343
Topics in Colloquial Spoken Arabic I

345
Topics in Colloquial Spoken Arabic II
A continuation of the everyday spoken language used in a particular Arabic-speaking country or region. Spoken varieties of Arabic taught may include Egyptian, Levantine, Gulf Varieties, and North African.
354
Topics in Arabic Language and Linguistics
Exploration of aspects of the Arabic language through classical and modern sources. Topics may include the history of the Arabic language, Arabic in Muslim contexts, the varieties of Arabic, Arabic linguistics, and the grammatical tradition.
358
Topics in Cinema of Muslim Societies
Exploration of the diversity of national and regional cinemas in predominantly Muslim societies of the world.
360
Topics in Muslim Literatures
Study of literary texts within the context of the rich, diverse traditions and cultures of predominantly Muslim societies of the world.
Archaeology
63
201
Introduction to Archaeology
Basic principles of archaeology. How archaeological remains are located, recovered and interpreted.
205
Ancient Peoples and Places
An overview of Old and New World archaeology; the emergence of humans; development of humans and culture from hunting/gathering to agricultural and ancient urban societies.
303
Archaeology of North America
Prehistoric cultural developments in North America.
306
Field Course in Archaeological Techniques
Practical application of modern field techniques in archaeology, including excavation, recording and analysis of sites, artifacts and related materials.
307
Introduction to Ethnoarchaeology
Theory, method, ethics and the contributions of ethnoarchaeological research to archaeology and other disciplines are explored using worldwide examples.
317
Archaeology of the Ancient Puebloan Southwest
Survey of the Puebloan archaeology of southwestern North America and their pre-Puebloan ancestors. Topics include changes in hunter-gatherer mobility and economy, the rise of agriculture in the American Southwest, the rise of integrative communities and religious belief systems, as well as responses to violence, disease, climate change, and the immigration of non-Puebloan outsiders.
321
Mammoths to Maize, Medicine Wheels and Warriors: Archaeology of the Canadian Plains
Introduction to Canadian Plains archaeology. Processes of cultural and social change on the northern plains over the last 12,000 years from early hunters of Ice–Age megafauna to tribal level farming societies are explored from a Canadian Plains perspective.
325
Ancient Civilizations
The rise and achievements of the earliest civilizations in both the Old and New Worlds. Emphasis will be placed on the civilizations of Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, China, Mesoamerica and the Andes.
327
Topics in Archaeology and Popular Culture

329
Fringe Archaeology
Explores popular, fantastic and alternate interpretations of archaeological remains presented in the press and popular media and analyzes the logical flaws in pseudoscientific explanations. Students hone their critical thinking skills and discover the “real story” about our past revealed by the science of archaeology.
331
Archaeology and the Media
Explores how the ancient world, human evolution, archaeologists, and archaeology are represented in a range of media (e.g. films, books, video games, websites, newspapers). Examines how archaeologists use digital media and social media sites to conduct research, as well as disseminate information to indigenous communities and the general public.
335
African Stone Age
Introduction to the African Stone Age, with emphasis on sub-Saharan Africa. Major cultural developments are explored through archaeological data, as well as other disciplines, including biogeography and geoarchaeology. Topics include early human origins and the behaviour of early humans during the middle Pleistocene, as well as the Later Stone Age. Focus on major chronological events and the cultural processes that characterize the Paleolithic era on the continent.
341
Ancient Mexico
Ancient cultures of Mexico, excluding the Maya, from their beginnings to the historic period. Emphasis on the civilizations of the Olmecs, Zapotecs, Teotihuacanos, Toltecs and Aztecs.
343
The Ancient Maya
Ancient Maya, from their beginnings to the historic period. Emphasis on the Classic Maya civilization, from AD 200-900.
345
The Legacy of Mesoamerica
Traditional native cultures of Middle America. Emphasis is on technology, social organization, economic systems, religions, arts and languages, particularly in the culture centres of Mexico.
347
Regional Studies in Latin American Archaeology
A general survey of the archaeology of the region and an intensive look at the archaeology of the immediate vicinity, including visits to sites and museums. Content varies according to region in Latin America where course is taught. Individual and group study are interspersed with formal instruction.
353
Archaeology of South America
Reviews the major events and cultural processes in Pre-Columbian South America beginning with the first hunting cultures. Emphasis is on central and Andean and northern lowland South American civilizations.
355
Native Cultures of the Amazon
A survey of the culture and linguistics of aboriginal South America, with emphasis on the lowland regions.
357
The Incas and Their Successors
Traditional cultures of the Ecuadorian, Peruvian and Bolivian Andes. Special emphasis is placed on the social, political and economic organizations of the Inca empire.
395
African Archaeology

399
Ethnohistory of Africa
Examples of African ethnohistory are explored using the techniques found in African historical archaeology including oral history and traditions, ethnoarchaeology, genetics, archaeology, historical records and art history.
401
Archaeology of the Near East
Survey of the prehistory of the Near East, starting with the earliest traces of human activity up to the Bronze Age. Topics include adaptations to a varied environment, successive human migrations out of Africa, the nature of the Middle-Upper Palaeolithic transition, the agricultural revolution, and the world’s earliest cities and states.
415
Lithic Technology
Study and analysis of tools and other artifacts, including their forms, methods of manufacture and use.
417
Zooarchaeology
The study and analysis of osteological remains used in reconstructing the subsistence strategies of past peoples.
419
Tipi, Buffalo, and Vision: People of the Plains
Explores traditional Plains cultures as recorded in ethnographic accounts and First Nations oral traditions.
423
Archaeology of the Arctic
Prehistory/history of N. E. Asia, Alaska, Canada and Greenland. Emphasis will be placed on ecological and ethnographical data.
437
Paleolithic Archaeology in the Old World
A global survey of Old World prehistoric hunter-gatherers with an emphasis on factual data, analytical techniques, and interpretive trends in the study of the Paleolithic era.
439
African Complex Societies
Ancient African complex societies with an emphasis on state development south of the Sahara. Topics include why these states developed, their participation in internal and international systems of exchange, technological developments, belief systems that supported power structures, and the reasons for their collapse. Time period covered is from the rise of the ancient state of Egypt to the colonial period.
443
Hunter-Gatherer Archaeology
An overview of the history of hunter-gatherer studies in anthropology and archaeology. Introduces current theoretical issues in hunter-gatherer research.
451
Introduction to Method and Theory
A survey of contemporary approaches to the study of archaeology.
453
Fundamentals of Geoarchaeology
Analytical methods used in geoarchaeology. The interpretation of site and regional context, provenance, and paleoenvironment, and the application of dating methods, chemical and isotopic methods, and remote sensing. Case studies and experiential learning through field examples.
455
Paleoindian Archaeology
Comprehensive overview of early hunter-gatherer archaeology in North and South America, including the Clovis/pre-Clovis debate, theoretical issues surrounding early hunting and mobility, the migration to the Americas during the last ice age, and cultural ecological dynamics.
471
Ceramic Analysis
The production of pottery: raw materials and techniques. Form, function and decoration. Ceramic ecology. Field processing and sampling. Classification: a survey of approaches. Ceramics and archaeological inference. Practical exercises.
490
Current Topics in Archaeology
Examination of current theoretical, methodological, or topical issues in archaeology.
503
Gender in Prehistory
The theoretical background for feminist archaeology and some of the important advances in Old and New World gender studies. Topics include the relationship of gender hierarchy to the rise of the state; contrasts between the ideological representation of gender and culture practice; and an overarching theme of critical analysis relating the present to the past.
506
Advanced Archaeological Field Techniques
Training in the more advanced aspects of field work.
515
Paleoethnobotany
The study of the uses of plants for food and other purposes such as tools by people in the past through archaeological remains and ethnobotanical research with contemporary people. Macroscopic and microscopic plant remains, such as phytoliths, starch grains, seeds, and charcoal are employed to reconstruct the past environments of ancient people. Theoretical and ethnobotanical issues such as folk taxonomy and ownership of traditional knowledge are explored.
523
Human Ecology
Current directions in various subfields of human ecology as they apply to Anthropology, Archaeology, and Geography.
531
Advanced Topics in Archaeology
Investigation of various theoretical, methodological, analytical, and/or topical issues in archaeology.
537
Topics in Mesoamerican Archaeology
Focus on particular time periods or themes in Mesoamerican archaeology and ethnohistory.
555
Human Osteology
Identification and interpretation of human skeletal and dental remains. Emphasis is on functional anatomy and reconstruction of prehistoric lifeways.
591
Landscape Archaeology
Human perceptions and uses of the biophysical and cultural environment. The emphasis is on the act of humanizing the environment by naming places, identifying resources, establishing paths, and modifying the natural landscape thereby creating a tradition of land use that can be accessed archaeologically.
593
Household Archaeology
Human perceptions and uses of the built environment, particularly residential architecture. The emphasis is on the structure and symbolism associated with the spatial arrangements of objects, activities, and social interactions.
595
Problems in Palaeopathology and Palaeonutrition
Patterns of disease in prehistoric human populations with consideration to the interaction of health and nutrition. Techniques for determining disease and nutrition from prehistoric remains are covered.
596
Honours Thesis (BSc)
Students carry out an analytical research project and produce a final written report.
597
Independent Reading Course
An independent reading course for archaeology Majors. Each student is required to choose reading in consultation with an advisor.
598
Honours Thesis (BA)
Students carry out a research project and produce a final written report.
601
Theoretical Foundations
The philosophy of science, the history of anthropological theory, and a survey of contemporary theoretical approaches in anthropology. Throughout, the relevance to and connections with the subdisciplines of archaeology and biological anthropology will be emphasized.
603
Seminar on Special Topics
Intensive study of special problems of particular interest to Archaeology Department graduate students. Subject matter for any particular year to be left to the discretion of the Department.
613
Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains
Methods of analyzing human remains from archaeological contexts with emphasis on identification and description. Lecture, lab and weekly seminar directed to Archaeology graduate students who have not had a previous course in human osteology.
615
Topics in Archaeological Theory and Method
The history of archaeological theory and contemporary theoretical and methodological approaches used in archaeological research.
617
Theory and its Application in Biological Anthropology
Basic issues in the study of human adaptation with a focus on principles of evolutionary biology as they apply to modern studies. Throughout, a bio-cultural approach will be emphasized.
619
Advanced Topics in Human Osteology
Current developments in interpretation of human skeletal and dental remains. Topics include forensic anthropology, bone biology, and population reconstruction.
621
Problems in Ethnoarchaeology
Seminar on selected topics relating to ethnoarchaeology.
625
Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations
Intensive study of contemporary and prehistoric hunter-gatherer social and economic adaptations.
627
Origins of Agriculture
Intensive study of the origins of agriculture throughout the world.
631
The Development of Complex Societies
The rise, development, and collapse of complex societies throughout the world.
633
Specialized Analyses of Archaeological Materials
Theory and practice for specialized analyses of the physical and chemical composition of archaeological materials, including microscopic traces of use. Topics will cover procedures used to prepare materials for such specialized analyses and to identify the relevant properties, as well as issues of quantification and interpretation.
635
Social Identity
Social identity is a fundamental theoretical and practical concern for archaeologists, physical anthropologists, and paleoanthropologists. Explores how humans use material culture and material practices to interact in a world ordered by social identities. Students will explore how research in their area of interest has addressed social identities.
637
Mesoamerican Archaeology and History
Ancient history of Mesoamerica, emphasizing a conjunctive approach based on hieroglyphic, historical and ethnohistorical sources as well as on archaeological evidence.
639
Stable Isotope Methods in Archaeology
Methods and applications of stable isotope analysis to archaeological research. Topics to be covered include the use of light stable isotopes to determine past and present diet, the use of stable isotopes to document residence and migration, analysis of stable carbon isotopes in soils, stable isotope ecology for environmental reconstruction and paleoclimate studies.
701
Special Topics in World Archaeology
Archaeology of particular geographical areas such as Circumpolar, North America, Mesoamerica, South America, Africa, Oceania, and Europe and Near East.
703
Advanced Seminar in Selected Topics

Architectural Studies
11
201
Architecture and the Built Environment
An introduction to architecture as an artistic and scientific endeavour as well as an examination of its purpose and intentions, its processes, and its products. Students will develop an understanding of the social, cultural, historical, technological, economic, and natural context influencing the design of buildings and other objects.
421
Architecture and Life Cycle Thinking: Climate Change and Beyond
An introduction to strategies for comparing building and product performance in relation to environmental impacts and contributions to climate change. Concepts of circular economy, life cycle analysis, embedded energy, recycling/reuse of building materials are explored through the lenses of resource depletion, carbon and water footprints and waste generation
423
Sustainability in the Built Environment
An examination of the built environment and the tools to achieve a stable and balanced and a regenerative ecosystem in a process of responsible consumption, wherein waste is minimized and the built environment interacts with natural environments and cycles. Healthful interior environments, resource efficiency, ecologically benign materials, renewable energies and social justice issues are examined.
431
Design Thinking in the Built Environment Studio I
A foundational introduction to design thinking as applied to the built environment of buildings, cities, and landscapes. Students will complete a series of experiential learning exercises that emphasize three-dimensional thinking and problem-solving skills. The course is offered in a studio environment, which along with the course-work, will provide valuable experience to develop a portfolio.
441
Design Thinking in the Built Environment Studio II

444
Studio II in Architecture
A studio exploring the application of ordering principles of architecture and to the numerous layers that contributes to the quality of inhabitation of place and space through design. Issues explored include the formal, the experiential and the theoretical concerns of architectural design in today's cultural context.
449
Building Science and Technology I
Functioning of the building enclosure: demonstration of the behaviour of building elements and their sub-assemblies under differential temperature and pressure stresses; fundamentals of acoustics; nature and use of building materials; response of building materials to climatic cycles radiation, precipitation, heating and cooling.
451
Graphics Workshop I
A skill building course with instruction and supervised experience in basic drafting, sketching and rendering; principles of perspective, drawing and presentation conventions. A variety of instruction may be offered to accommodate the varied level of student development.
453
Graphics Workshop II

457
History of Architecture and Human Settlements

484
Studio I in Architecture
A studio that explores the foundation concepts in architectural design and form making involving a sequence of progress skill building, visual and spatial thinking and problem solving exercises.
Art
77
231
Art Fundamentals: 2D
Foundation course in two-dimensional art making. Creative exploration of pictorial space, composition and design will occur via learning fundamentals of perspective, colour, shape, balance and unity. Approaches may include wet and dry media, digital technologies, collage. These will be addressed in the context of research, problem solving, visual fluency and conceptual development.
233
Art Fundamentals: 3D
Foundation course in three-dimensional art making. Creative exploration may include media such as plaster, clay, wood, and found objects. Technical approaches may include mold-making, casting, additive and subtractive processes. Form, mass, volume and materials will be addressed in the context of research, problem solving, visual fluency and conceptual development.
235
Introduction to Photography and Digital Imaging
An introductory course in current photographic methods, including digital photography, digital image processing and the presentation of photographs.
241
Drawing I
Introductory course in observational and representational drawing. Creative exploration includes mark-making, hand-eye co-ordination, proportions, perspective, line, texture, figure-ground relationships and pictorial composition. Approaches may include pencil, conté, charcoal, pastel, pen and ink. These will be addressed in the context of research, problem-solving, visual fluency and conceptual development.
243
Drawing II
Developing observational and representational skills through figure drawing and exploration of the contemporary field. Approaches will include a more developed understanding of colour, research, problem solving, visual fluency and conceptual development.
251
Media Arts: Practice and Theory
Technical instruction and creative opportunities in the media arts, in addition to examination of historical, theoretical and critical context.
271
Introduction to Printmaking
Basic concepts and techniques in Fine Art Printmaking.
301
Studies in Contemporary Canadian Art
Study of recent Canadian art from a range of perspectives in art criticism.
309
Foundations of Art Education
An introduction to the history, theory and philosophy of art education through participatory learning events.
311
Topics in Art
Topics related to contemporary studio and curatorial practices such as spirituality, exhibitions, digital storytelling, new media, or public art.
313
Video Art
Focuses on concepts, issues, and techniques of video as an art medium. Students will gain experience and a working knowledge of concept development, video shooting and digital editing, in the context of contemporary art theory and practice.
315
Programming for Artists
An introduction to computer programming techniques used to create interactive art projects.
317
Electronics for Artists
Theoretical and practical applications of basic electronic principles and techniques involving the use of electronics in contemporary art practices. Will include applied experiences with hardware and visual programming environments.
319
Digital Illustration
Introduces students to vector-based illustration techniques, their historical context, and terminology. The course provides a focus on the fundamentals of designing with imagery, and the relationship between verbal and visual communication.
321
Net Art: Theory and Practice
Examination of the work of Net-based artists and investigation of the Internet as a vehicle to extend art and design practice.
323
Digital Sculpture
Introduces students to 3D modelling by means of digital sculpting techniques, their historical context and terminology. Provides a focus on the fundamentals of working and designing in three-dimensional space.
327
Art Now I
A series of presentations by visiting artists and scholars that introduces students to professional practices of contemporary visual artists.
329
Art Now II
A series of presentations by visiting artists and scholars that introduces students to professional practices of contemporary visual artists.
331
2D Digital Imaging
Electronic visualization involving computer applications in artistic practice.
332
Topics in Photography
Studio inquiry in photography developing students’ foundational, technical and conceptual skills. Exploration of topics in photography such as large format, projection, narrative and fine art printing processes will enable research creation directed toward self-generated practice. Activities will include workshops, studio practice and critique.
334
Time-Based Art
Exploration of time and duration as a component of artistic practice, that may include the use of frame-based media and camera-less animation.
336
Digital Photography
Fundamental technical, aesthetic and conceptual considerations in digital photography, camera use and the use of desktop editing software in support of fine art photography. Introduction to digital printing for photographic artists. A portion of assigned course work will be output as inkjet prints.
338
Film Photography
Further work in photography, using film and silver-based photographic materials including intensive use of the variables of exposure, film development and silver-based printing of photographic materials.
340
Panorama and 360 Virtual Reality Photography
Students learn how to use software and hardware needed to create panoramas and virtual tours.
341
Drawing the Figure
Theory and practice of drawing the human figure at a developing level involving an extended range of drawing media.
342
Art Education Across the Lifespan I
An exploration of the cognitive, emotional, and social development of infants, children and adolescents learning art. Students will engage in experiential learning in formal and informal settings.
343
Drawing: Construction of Pictorial Space
Extends the range of concepts and practices in drawing to include pictorial space.
344
Art Education Across the Lifespan II
An exploration of the cognitive, emotional, and social development of adults learning art. Students will engage in experiential learning in formal and informal settings.
345
Anatomical Drawing I
Perceptual and drawing skills pertaining to human anatomical relationships.
347
Anatomical Drawing II
Further development of anatomical drawing skills including anatomical structures of the hands and the muscles of facial expression.
349
Drawing for the Biological Sciences
Basic and more complex principles of drawing from subjects pertaining to the biological sciences; drawing from observation, exploration of foundational skills in a cross-disciplinary context.
350
Painting: Materials and Processes
Technical and conceptual exploration of painting, with experimentation in at least two media, including acrylic and/or oil. May include colour theory, painting style, application of materials and different painting supports.
351
Painting: Figuration
Exploration of painting proceeding from observation and traditions of figuration. Media will include acrylic and/or oil.
353
Painting: Abstraction
Exploration of painting proceeding from traditions of abstraction. Media will include acrylic and/or oil.
361
Visual Research Methods
Students utilize arts-based research methods to formulate and develop an independent project. Projects normally will be completed using digital photography.
363
Advanced Visual Research Methods
Students pursue individually designed arts-based research projects, examine approaches to editing, sequencing, and presenting projects to an audience. Projects normally will be completed using digital photography.
365
Topics in Studio Research and Critique I
Studio-based introduction to contemporary and emerging creative practices contextualized through critique. Topics may include: installation art, performance art, slip casting, or hybrid art forms.
373
Printmaking: Lithography
Basic concepts and techniques of lithographic printing.
377
Printmaking: Serigraphy
Basic concepts and techniques of silk-screen printing.
379
Printmaking: Relief and Intaglio

381
Sculpture: Materials and Processes
Technical and conceptual exploration of sculpture through materials and processes. This may include a range of methods such as mold-making, casting, assemblage, carving, welding, forging, riveting, time-based media, installation or digital media.
383
Sculpture: Concepts and Strategies
Conceptual and professional exploration of sculpture introducing students to strategies and concepts to assist in research and problem solving. Approaches may include understanding object-hood, material as content, serial art, art movements impacting sculpture, public art, and sculpture and the market.
397
Professional Development
Professional development activities, documentation and dissemination associated with working as a professional artist, including intellectual property, ethics, and the context of different art communities.
399
Art in Theory and Practice I
Theories of art, critical methodologies, and aesthetics in the visual arts across history and cultures.
401
Studies in Contemporary International Art
Study of recent international art practices from a range of perspectives in art criticism.
405
Mechatronic Art and Design
Focus on the development and production of physical systems-based artwork that incorporate elements of robotics, motion control, software and hardware design.  An introduction to electronic devices for use in artmaking, providing practical experience with sensors, motors, switches, gears, lights, simple circuits and computers to create kinetic and interactive works of art.
411
Selected Topics in Art Education
Exploration of topics in art education such as multiculturalism, creativity, developmental issues, or special needs learners.
421
Advanced Topics in Digital Arts
Advanced studio inquiry into digital art forms developing students’ technical and conceptual skills. Advanced exploration of digital media topics such as 2D graphics, 3D graphics, animation, motion capture, and modelling will enable research creation directed toward self-generated practice.
431
3D Digital Imaging
Creative research in 3D digital visualization and fabrication involving multimedia software and hardware. May include 3D printing, rapid prototyping, laser cutting, and computer controlled milling.
438
Advanced Topics in Photography
Advanced studio inquiry into photography developing students’ foundational, technical and conceptual skills. Deeper exploration of topics in photography such as long term projects, narrative, projection, printing and alternative processes will enable research creation directed toward self-generated practice. Activities will include workshops, studio practice and critique.
445
Advanced Topics in Drawing
Advanced studio inquiry into drawing that develops foundational, technical and conceptual skills. Deeper exploration of topics in drawing such as mixed media, street art and socio-political issues will enable research and creation directed toward self-generated practice.
451
Painting: Expanded Field
Students explore an expanded field of painting through installing and contextualizing their work. This may include pictorial, spatial, performative, and conceptual responses to site. Students may engage in collage/assemblage, shaped canvases, text/image, objects, paint, and unconventional materials.
455
Advanced Topics in Painting
Advanced studio inquiry into painting developing students’ foundational, technical and conceptual skills. Deeper exploration of painting will enable research creation directed toward self-generated practice. Activities will include workshops, studio practice and critique. Topics offered may include murals, gender and the body, figure and landscape, or materiality.
465
Topics in Studio Research and Critique II
A studio-based topics course that provides students with an opportunity for developing their exploration of contemporary and emerging creative research practices, contextualized via critique. Topics may include visiting artist, studio research, figure painting, visual research.
475
Advanced Topics in Printmaking
Advanced studio inquiry into printmaking developing students’ technical and conceptual skills. The course will explore advanced practices in areas such as lithography, serigraphy, intaglio through thematic approaches such as technology and place.
481
Sculpture: Mold Making and Casting
An exploration of mold making and casting techniques in the realization of sculptural forms.
485
Advanced Topics in Sculpture
Advanced studio inquiry into sculpture that develops technical and conceptual skills. Activities will include studio practice and critique enabling research creation directed toward self-initiated practice. Topics may include sculptural exploration of installation, performance, and site specific art.
491
Community-Based Art Experiences
A seminar and field experience course introducing prospective educators to all facets of planning and implementing positive art experiences in a non-school setting.
499
Art in Theory and Practice II
Examination and discussion of theoretical issues associated with current practice in art.
501
Advanced Topics in Media Arts
Advanced studio inquiry into media art forms developing students’ technical and conceptual skills. Topics may include: sound and interactivity, immersive art, tele-arts and projection mapping that will enable research creation directed toward self-generated practice.
503
Computer Game Design
The game design process will be explored, including a history of video games, genres, game mechanics, design documents, and a summary of the development process. The focus will be on design, rather than development, and the artistic and creative assets, rather than the software. Students will design a game and will create a playable prototype. The principles will be applicable to other sorts of games, and to media art in general.
509
Curriculum Building for Art
Developing curriculum and program structures for formal and community art education. Program design includes current theory and practice and a field research component.
513
Directed Study
Independent studio research under the supervision of a faculty member.
560
Honours Thesis
Independent studio research and production supported by a research paper for BFA Honours Visual Studies students, culminating in a Thesis Exhibition.
561
Advanced Studio II
Directed studio research and production.
563
Advanced Studio III
Further directed studio research and production.
565
Studio Research and Critique III
Advanced studio course that develops self-generated approaches to creative research and critique. Encourages engagement with contemporary and emerging practices and leads to critical fluency, contextualized via critique. Situated in an interdisciplinary setting, students can expect to encounter a wide range of themes and approaches to support their practice.
595
Studio Research
Independent studio research for honours students.
599
Professional Aspects of Art
Examination and discussion of the issues associated with the professional aspects of surviving as an artist. Presentations by professional artists practicing in the field will form a major component of the course.
601
History of Art I
Individual study: in consultation with the instructor, the student will select a research topic in art history or art criticism.
603
History of Art II
Individual study: in consultation with the instructor, the student will select a research topic in art history or art criticism.
605
Critical Study and Research
Individual study and research in the area of studio specialization, critical theory, methodological issues and/or historical topics.
609
Art Theory and Criticism
Investigation of contemporary global art theory and criticism.
611
Research Methods in Art
Introduces students to art making as a process of knowledge production and research creation.
661
Advanced Studio Practice

691
Pedagogy and Professional Practice
Issues in professional practice and post-secondary teaching in visual art. Optional course.
761
Advanced Independent Studio research
Theoretical and applied concepts in studio.
Art History
30
201
Introduction to Art History I
An examination of art and architecture before 1400  in relation to significant historical and cultural events.
203
Introduction to Art History II
An examination of art and architecture after 1400 in relation to significant historical and cultural events.
211
Writing and Art History
An introduction to the techniques and strategies of writing about art and cultural objects within the discipline of art history. Students develop and strengthen their writing skills in relation to addressing, evaluating, and assessing art.
305
Canadian Art History
A critical analysis of the forms, objects, and practices that compose the art canon of northern North America. Organized thematically, this course covers the period of history ranging from European contact to the present day.
311
Topics in Art History and Visual Studies
Key concepts and theories within the discipline of Art History. Topics may include: Feminist Art Histories; and Art and Social Critique.
319
Introduction to a History of Photography
An introduction to the histories of photography and the photographic image. Examines the development of photography as a technology, art form, and way of envisioning the world.
321
Medieval Art and Architecture
An examination of art and architecture c. 400- 1400.
323
Survey of Far Eastern Art: India and Related Civilizations
An examination of the art and architecture of ancient India and related civilizations, with special emphasis on Buddhist, Hindu and Islamic art.
325
Survey of Far Eastern Art: China and Related Civilizations
An examination of the art and architecture of ancient China and related civilizations, with special emphasis on Confucian, Taoist and Buddhist art.
327
Renaissance Art
An examination of the arts and architecture of Europe from c. 1300-1600.
331
Discourses of Modern Art and Architecture
A critical exploration of the development of and discussions about different art movements in relation to Modern Art and the avant-garde, addressing the historical circumstances that enabled the creation of selected art movements, which may include Impressionism, the Arts and Crafts Movement, Cubism, Surrealism, Pop Art, Fluxus, and Situationist.
333
Discourses of Contemporary Art and Architecture
An introduction to the socio-political approaches and critical discourses that have informed art-making in the contemporary period. Examines artworks and their production, circulation, and reception through a variety of positions including gender, race, sexuality, and post-coloniality.
340
Topics in Art and Technology
Examination of the development of art techniques and forms in relation to a variety of technologies. Topics may include the printing press, the history of video games, telematics, interactive art, and structures of surveillance.
343
A History of Design
An introduction to the history of design including international movements, materials and technologies, production and consumption, and contemporary issues of critical design practice.
357
Baroque Art
An examination of the art and architecture of Europe during the seventeenth century.
359
Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century Art
An examination of the art and architecture in Europe and its colonies during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
365
Survey of Far Eastern Art: Japan
An examination of the art and architecture of dynastic Japan, with special emphasis on Shinto and Buddhist traditions.
367
Indigenous Art of the Americas
Historical and contemporary studies of indigenous cultural production within the geographic context of the Americas.
371
Art and Site
An exploration of the ways in space, place, and context influence the meanings and values of art objects. Topics may include the history of displays, street art, art and the environment, and art in public spaces and sacred sites, and monuments.
389
Artist Case Study
Introduction to case study methodology in Art History by way of an in-depth study of the work and life of a particular artist.
411
Selected Topics in the History of Art
An in-depth examination of a particular topic related to the study of Art History.
425
Architecture in the Western World Since 1900
A survey of significant examples of modern architecture, defining their stylistic character in light of developments in technology, the history of ideas, and social and historical factors.
431
Art and the Body
A critical analysis of the power dynamics inherent to forms of looking and representations of the body in a variety of historical periods and geographical locations. May include gendered representations, the medicalized body, the body in classical art, and displays of marginalized bodies.
471
Topics in Global Art
An advanced exploration of topics and issues relevant to art-making and exhibitions within global contexts. Topics may include World’s Fairs, art biennales, outsider art, and souvenirs.
501
Independent Research in Art History
Independent research projects for advanced students in art history.
511
Capstone in the History of Art
A critical investigation of a particular subject related to the advanced study of Art History and Visual Culture.
513
Directed Studies in Art History
An independent research project conducted under the supervision of a faculty member.
613
Independent Study in Art History

615
Conference Course in Art History
Focuses on close examinations and discussions of students’ research and writing, with an emphasis on communicating informed research creation practices. The course will culminate in a conference presentation.
617
Thesis Development
A reading and conference course in the student's research area.
Arts
4
501
International Study Topics
Group or individual study topics which involve international experience. Group study topics will vary from year-to-year.
502
Academic Field Placement
Authorized academic field placements will vary from year-to-year.
503
Multidisciplinary Capstone
Participation in a seminar focused on completing and presenting individual research projects that integrate the primary and secondary focus within a student’s multidisciplinary degree program.
601
Theory and Practice of Teaching and Learning
An introduction, exploration, and application of the theories and practices of teaching undergraduate students in the arts, humanities, and social sciences.
Arts and Science Honours Academy
5
220
Quests and Questions
An introduction to a variety of perspectives on human culture. Students will inquire into such topics as the nature of discovery and creation, tradition and modernity, gender and social structure. These topics will be approached through careful analysis of artistic, literary, religious, philosophical and scientific texts.
321
Representation
Far more than a neutral reflection of the world, representation, be it of artistic, social or scientific phenomena, is a complex issue. Issues, inconsistencies and flaws arising from the concept of representation will be studied in a variety of contexts. Topics to be covered include: sensory perception from neurological, psychological and cultural perspectives; mimesis and metaphor in literature and the visual arts; and the use of images, imaging, and interpretative frameworks in the social and natural sciences.
421
Invention
From the slingshot to steam power to intellectual property, from prophets to scientists to novelists; the theory and practice of invention looms large in human history and is of particular importance to the present age. Examines the nature and development of technological, conceptual, and linguistic invention in a variety of contexts.
501
The Nature of Research
A consideration of academic research within the social, historical and political context of its production and use. Questions to be considered include, but are not limited to: the historical development of professions and disciplines; the cultural framework within which research is produced and the cultural uses of research; and the ways in which research creates objects of knowledge and serves to define and categorize human experience and identity.
503
Capstone Seminar
Students will reflect on their intellectual journey from both disciplinary and interdisciplinary perspectives. Each student will prepare two separate presentations: one on a topic related to their travel experience, the other related to their honours thesis or disciplinary specialty.
Astronomy
2
207
Introduction to Astronomy I - The Solar System
A comprehensive, descriptive overview of the solar system covering how ideas have changed from ancient times to today. The latest discoveries. The electromagnetic spectrum; telescopes and detectors; laws of planetary motion; planets, asteroids, comets, and the Sun. Formation of the solar system. Extra-solar planets and the possibility of extraterrestrial life. Possible field trip to the Rothney Astrophysical Observatory.
209
Introduction to Astronomy II - The Cosmos
A comprehensive, descriptive overview of the universe outside the solar system. The electromagnetic spectrum; stellar spectra; distance determinations. Origin and evolution of stars; white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes. The interstellar medium. Dark matter. Galaxies and quasars. The Big Bang. The fate of the universe. Possible field trip to the Rothney Astrophysical Observatory.
Astrophysics
10
305
Introduction to Astrophysics
Fundamentals of modern astrophysics including observations and physical interpretation physical phenomena in the Universe. Topics include the nature of the Sun and stars, galaxies, and the interstellar medium; distances and motions in the universe; radiation and telescopes; celestial mechanics; stellar evolution. Minor laboratory exercises including one at the Rothney Astrophysical Observatory as circumstances permit.
307
Introduction to Observational Astrophysics
Lectures and practical laboratory sessions in observational astronomy. Students will collect, reduce, and interpret astronomical data, develop an understanding of telescopes, instruments, and detectors; reduction and analysis methods; simulations and model fitting; data and error analysis. Observations will be carried out at the Rothney Astrophysical Observatory and/or the main campus.
401
Galactic Astrophysics
The galaxy: space distribution of stars and interstellar material; kinematics and dynamics of stellar systems; rotation and spiral structure; classification and global properties of galaxies; active galaxies.
403
Stellar Structure and Evolution
Observational properties of stars; equations of stellar structure; physics of stellar interiors; structure and evolution of stars; white dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes; observational aspects of stellar atmospheres; radiative transfer in stellar atmospheres; opacity; spectral line formation.
409
Planetary Astrophysics
Orbital mechanics. Planetary interiors, surfaces, atmosphere, ionospheres and magnetospheres. Solar magnetism and activity cycles. Comets, asteroids, meteorites. Origin of the solar system. Exoplanets.
503
The Interstellar Medium
Multiwavelength observations of gas and dust in our Galaxy; distribution and physics of neutral atomic hydrogen and molecules; interstellar chemistry; physics of dust grains; HII regions; interstellar shocks; gas dynamics; star formation.
509
High Energy Astrophysics and Cosmology
Clusters of galaxies; microwave and X-ray background radiation; dark matter and dark energy; overview of cosmology; general relativistic considerations; large-scale structure and expansion of the universe; nucleosynthesis; gamma ray bursts and cosmic rays.
607
Advanced Observational Astrophysics
Principles and tools of modern ground-based and space astronomy emphasizing ultraviolet, optical, infrared, and radio radiation. Data acquisition and reduction techniques for astrometry, photometry, spectroscopy, imaging, and interferometry. Use of astronomical data analysis software.
611
Radio Astronomy
Wave propagation, antennas, interferometry, aperture synthesis, radio receivers, and spectrometers. Applications to continuum and line radiation in stars, interstellar medium and extragalactic objects.
621
High Energy Astrophysics
Interaction of high energy particles with matter, propagation and origin of cosmic rays; structure of white dwarfs and neutron stars; the physics of jets and the accretion process onto compact objects; supernovae and supernova remnants; active galactic nuclei.
Biochemistry
21
341
Biochemistry of Life Processes
Emphasis is placed on describing the chemistry of biochemical molecules including proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids, and how this relates to cell structure and life processes. Basic concepts of metabolism are introduced, focusing on the breakdown of carbohydrates for energy. The laboratory component reinforces learning of the lecture material, while teaching technical skills and the analysis and interpretation of experiments involving biochemical molecules.
393
Introduction to Biochemistry
Biomolecules and metabolism as a foundation for understanding molecular organization and reactions of life. Relationships between structure and biological function of amino acids, proteins, lipids, nucleic acids and coenzymes. Principles of metabolism are illustrated using key metabolic pathways. Laboratory involves inquiry-based approaches for studying biomolecules and metabolic pathways.
401
Biochemistry Laboratory Techniques I
Recombinant DNA techniques, protein expression and mutagenesis stressing nucleic acid and protein properties relevant to these techniques. Practical experience in the laboratory includes DNA amplification (PCR), gene cloning and expression, nucleic acid-protein bioinformatics and introduction to methods for working with proteins. Emphasis on the scientific process: experimental design, data analysis and dissemination of results.
403
Biochemistry Laboratory Techniques II
Chromatography, protein purification, biophysical and enzymatic means of characterizing proteins. Practical experience in the laboratory with protein purification and protein characterization techniques selected to complement the selection from Biochemistry Laboratory Techniques I.
431
Proteins and Proteomics
Protein structure and chemistry: structural motifs, ligand-binding, conformational changes, chemical modification; protein folding; structure prediction by molecular modelling. Identification of proteins in the proteome: 2D gel electrophoresis and chromatography, mass spectrometry; metalloproteins; post-translational modifications; protein-protein interactions.
443
Metabolism
Intermediary carbohydrate, lipid, amino acid and nucleotide metabolism, and the regulation of these metabolic pathways.
471
Physical Biochemistry
The laws of thermodynamics as they apply to biological systems: the hydrophobic effect, properties of water, electrolyte solutions and ligand binding. Optical spectroscopic methods including UV/visible absorption, fluorescence, and infrared as applied to biological molecules.
507
Advanced Topics in Biochemistry
Independent research or reading project that may include seminars, lectures, term papers and training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods.
528
Independent Studies in Biochemistry
Original and independent thought, practical research and the completion of written and oral reports.
530
Honours Research Project in Biochemistry
Research project under the direction of one or more faculty members in the Department of Biological Sciences. Formal written and oral reports must be presented on completion of this course. Open only to Honours Biochemistry students or Honours Biological Sciences students.
541
Concepts in Biochemical Toxicology
An interdisciplinary course focused on the diverse biomolecular mechanisms by which organic (e.g. PCB’s) and inorganic pollutants (e.g. Cd, Hg, As) adversely affect cell function examined at multiple levels of organization, from molecules to whole animals organisms. Topics include how natural toxins exert toxicity, how toxins/light generate free radicals within cells, how the speciation of metals in the environment affects their bioavailability/toxicity, and the toxicity mechanisms that lead to homeostatic dysfunction.
543
Enzymology
The structure, mechanisms and biological interactions of enzymes. Binding, catalysis, rates and regulation will be discussed with regard to chemical principles of kinetics and reaction. The principles of enzyme action will be considered in the context of the biological role that enzymes play.
547
Signal Transduction and Regulation of Metabolism
Principles of signal transduction with examples from prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Discussion of protein covalent modifications, inositol lipid signaling, structure and function of protein kinases and protein phosphatases and their role in regulating various aspects of cell function. Emphasis on metabolic pathways, cell cycle control, checkpoints, DNA damage response and epigenetics.
551
Structural Biology
Applications of modern methods to structural studies of proteins and nucleic acids by NMR and X-ray crystallography with a comparison of the structural information derived from the two methods. Crystallization of macromolecules. Experimental and theoretical foundations of X-ray and NMR structure determination, and ligand binding. Non-invasive NMR studies of metabolism, and magnetic resonance imaging.
553
Molecular Biophysics
A comprehensive survey of modern biophysics covering the flow and processing of matter, energy and information in living systems. Equilibrium and non-equilibrium thermodynamics in biology. Molecular motors and facilitated proton transport. An integrative approach connecting atomistic theories to cellular processes.
555
Biomembranes
The material examines the structure and function of biological membranes with a strong emphasis on the role of membrane proteins. Topics may include: the physical properties of lipid bilayers, isolation and purification of membrane proteins, preparation of membrane mimetic systems, ion and solute movement across membranes (transport and ion channels), membrane protein folding, assembly and structure, and protein secretion and translocation systems.
561
Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology
An introduction to the language, materials, methods, concepts and commercial applications of biotechnology with emphasis on methodology, proteins as products, and the impact of genome sequencing on biotechnology. Topics will also include microbial, animal, and bioremediation biotechnology, expanding the genetic code, synthetic biology, antibiotic resistance, cancer immunotherapy, stem cells, and gene therapy.
575
Lipids
Structure and function of lipids including phospholipids, sphingolipids, and steroids. Topics include properties of lipids and bilayers, lipid-lipid and lipid-protein interactions, technological applications, biosynthesis and regulation, lipids as second messengers, intracellular trafficking, and lipids in physiology and disease. Literature review and student seminars are significant components of this course.
577
Biomolecular Simulation
Introduction to simulation and computer modelling methods commonly used in biochemistry and biophysics, with a focus on physical models to understand the behaviour of biomolecules. Topics include simulation methods, dynamics of proteins, DNA, and lipids, calculation of binding constants, protein-drug interactions, properties of ion channels as well as a number of recent literature topics.
641
Selected Topics in Biochemistry
Selected topics in Biochemistry such as those which appear annually in the serial publication Annual Review of Biochemistry.
731
Current Topics in Biochemistry
A discussion of contemporary experimental and theoretical biochemical methods used for the study of drugs and diagnostics at a biomolecular level. Structural analysis, drug design and computational methods will be introduced, as well as modern 'omics' research approaches and current protein drug targets of the pharmaceutical industry.
Biology
31
202
The Science of Food, Cooking and Eating
Introduction to a scientific understanding of food and cooking using principles from a range of biological sciences, including biochemistry, molecular biology, microbiology, immunology, physiology and ecology. Topics include: building blocks of food, molecular-level understanding of recipes, biochemical reactions of cooking, microbiology of food production, physiology of sensory apparatus, food-related diseases, and industrialized food production.
205
The Organization and Diversity of Life
A study of biological concepts and mechanisms illustrated by current examples of medical and environmental problems.
241
Energy Flow in Biological Systems
An introduction to the energetics of life from molecules through ecosystems. Topics include: energy in biological systems; how different organisms obtain, store and use energy; energy budgets of organisms; and energy flow through cells and ecosystems.
243
DNA, Inheritance and Evolution
An introduction to central concepts in evolution and DNA as a vehicle for inheritance of genetic information. Topics include: the nature of genetic information and inheritance including transcription, translation and replication; natural selection and speciation; origin and history of biodiversity.
297
Topics in Biology
Lectures and study in biological sciences.
305
The Human Organism
An introduction to human biology that analyzes the structure and function of systems in our bodies. Leads to an appreciation of how the human body maintains itself and carries out the functions necessary to sustain any organism. A course for non-majors that will develop their understanding of the anatomy and physiology of their own species in a zoological and evolutionary context.
307
Ecology and Human Affairs
The major principles of ecology. How the physical environment affects organisms; behavioural ecology and life histories; species interactions; the biology of populations, communities, and ecosystems; biodiversity and conservation. The non-biologists will gain an understanding of ecological and evolutionary principles that will allow them to better appreciate the natural world, and the increasing environmental impacts of humans.
309
Plants and People
A review of the structure and function of plants. A survey of the nature of people's basic food plants and an overview of agricultural and forestry practices. Plant improvement by traditional and modern methods, and plant propagation.
311
Principles of Genetics
Topics will include Mendelian inheritance, allelic relationships, genetic linkage, sex linkage, changes in chromosome structure, segregation and recombination, epistasis, molecular genetics, genetics of bacteria and viruses, gene fine structure, gene function, complementation, bioinformatics and regulation of gene expression. Several selected organisms will be used in the laboratories to illustrate pertinent genetic principles.
313
Principles of Ecology
The ecological principles, theories and interactions of organisms at individual, population, community and ecosystem levels will be explored. Ecological principles will be applied to examine current issues involving conservation of species, habitats, biodiversity and ecosystem function.
315
Quantitative Biology I
Data collection, presentation and analysis in the biological sciences. Basic design of biological experiments including concepts of control, replication, and interspersion. Analysis of biological data will include tests of statistical hypotheses and estimation techniques.
331
Introduction to Cellular and Molecular Biology
The principles of cellular structure and function. Molecular organization of membranes, organelles, nucleus and cytoplasmic structures; the integration of cellular functions; assembly of organelles; the regulation of cell proliferation; and the interaction of cells with their neighbours and their environment.
371
Comparative Biology of Plants and Animals
An exploration of how multicellular organisms meet the challenges of living, both as individuals, and in an evolutionary context. Parallels and divergence between plants and animals are illustrated in their responses to the challenges they face, with the water-to-land transition forming a central theme in shaping the form and function of plant and animal life.
375
Insects, Science and Society
Examination of insects as the most diverse and abundant form of animal life on the planet, why they are so successful and how they influence our lives. Topics include how insects are built, what they do, and how they interact with people and have come to be so important economically and culturally, as pests, pollinators, experimental animals, maintaining our environment and forming complex societies. Other topics include evolution of insects, insects in history and culture and how insects can help us address issues such as biological conservation, climate change and animal rights.
401
Evolutionary Biology
An introduction to the micro- and macro-evolutionary processes responsible for the diversity of organisms. Topics include heredity, genetic variation, population structure, genetic drift, natural selection and adaptation, sexual selection, evolution of interactions between species, speciation, phylogeny and biogeography.
435
Biology of Fungi
Morphology, life history patterns and systematics of fungi. Fungal ecology including fungi as parasites, symbionts and decomposers. Basic molecular biology, genetics and physiology.
451
Conservation Biology
The application of ecological theory and principles to the conservation and management of natural and modified ecosystems, with emphasis on preservation of biodiversity and sustainable development. Topics include disturbance as an ecological process, ecological and evolutionary responsiveness of natural systems, ecology of resource harvesting, management of endangered habitats and populations, implications of human population growth and global change.
453
Plants in their Environment
An integration of physiological and ecological aspects of plant adaptation to different environments. Topics include interactions between plants and other organisms (e.g., bacterial and fungal symbionts, animal pollinators, herbivores) as well as the influence of abiotic stressors on plant growth and distribution. The ecological consequences and possible applications of such interactions are discussed.
501
Principles and Mechanism of Pharmacology
Basic principles of pharmacology, with specific emphasis on receptor signaling mechanisms. Explores the application of pharmacological principles to the treatment of disease.
503
Pharmacology of Organ Systems
Through analysis and discussion of research literature, this course explores topics in pharmacology including the nervous, cardiovascular, renal, respiratory and immune systems, as well as anti-cancer therapies.
505
Medicinal Plant Biochemistry
Deals with biochemical, molecular, and cellular aspects of plant metabolism, natural product diversity in the plant kingdom, and modern molecular and biochemical methods to understand plant metabolism. The focus is on the metabolic pathways that are either unique to plants, or that exhibit unique features in, plants. Several key plant pathways that produce plant-derived medicines will be discussed.
515
Cellular Mechanisms of Disease
The cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying basic human disease processes and how these can be influenced by lifestyle and environmental factors. The ways in which this knowledge can be used in the laboratory diagnosis of disease.
520
Field Course in Tropical Biology
An examination of biodiversity in a selected region of the tropics, including aspects of ecology of animals and plants, animal behaviour and an introduction to field techniques for observing and censusing selected taxa. Field studies will take place at forest and savannah sites with consideration of community-based conservation efforts.
530
Honours Research Project in Biological Sciences
Research project under the direction of one or more faculty members in the Department of Biological Sciences. Formal written and oral reports must be presented on completion of this course. Open only to Honours Biological Sciences students.
591
Invertebrate Biodiversity
Field course in the natural history and classification of invertebrates as they are encountered in their natural habitat. Course material will include: techniques for collection and identification of major groups of invertebrates; aspects of behaviour and ecology of local species; use of invertebrates as indicators of environmental change; censusing/monitoring invertebrates populations.
601
Research Seminar

607
Special Problems in Biology
Independent research or reading project that may include seminars, term papers and training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods.
609
Advanced Statistical Applications in Biology
Explains and demonstrates the analysis of biological data with general linear models, generalized linear models, maximum-likelihood fitting of non-linear models, and resampling techniques. Content is presented in a workshop format, so that students learn the application of computer analysis coincidentally with statistical concepts.
617
Darwin’s Origin of Species
An examination of the first edition of Charles Darwin's “On the Origin of Species” and related writings. Students will lead discussions of scientific, philosophical, and other issues raised by the book.
619
Advanced Evolutionary Biology
The theory of organic evolution. Historical development of evolutionary ideas. Darwin's contribution. The mechanism of natural selection; sexual, kin and group selection. The application of the theory in biogeography, ecology, ethology and other areas of biology.
703
Recent Advances in Biology
Lectures, seminars and/or laboratories on special advanced topics in biological sciences. Each student should seek consent of a departmental faculty member who will supervise the chosen study.
Biomedical Engineering
19
301
Introduction to Biomedical Engineering
Fundamentals of biological systems and the application of engineering principles to solving problems in medicine. Topics include pharmaceuticals and drug delivery, instrumentation and devices, physiological and biological measurements, biomechanics, the Scientific Method and the Canadian health-care system. Applications may include cardiovascular, neural and musculo-skeletal systems.
309
Anatomy and Physiology for Engineers
Physiological terminology and anatomical planes of reference; cell biology and physiology; includes structure and function of musculoskeletal, cardiac, nervous, gastrointestinal and respiratory tissues and systems; diseases and disorders of those systems; design constraints for bioengineering products.
401
Fundamentals of Biomedical Device Design
An introduction to the development of biomedical devices. Topics may include identifying market needs, idea generation, biologically inspired deign, human factors related to design, regulatory issues, intellectual property protection, clinical trials, and commercialization considerations. Case studies may be drawn from cardiovascular, neural and musculoskeletal applications.
500
Biomedical Engineering Research Thesis
A research project in an area of interest, directed by a project advisor/faculty member within the Schulich School of Engineering, Cumming School of Medicine, Faculty of Kinesiology, or Faculty of Science. Includes a lecture component covering the scientific process, ethics, review of literature, and writing scientific proposals and manuscripts. The course culminates with a written thesis and presentation. Projects may involve experimental, analytic or computer modelling studies.
501
Biomedical Engineering Project
A project in an area of interest, supervised by a project advisor/faculty member within the Schulich School of Engineering, Cumming School of Medicine, Faculty of Kinesiology, or Faculty of Science. Includes a lecture component covering topics including the scientific process, ethics, review of literature, patent searches, market analysis, and technology evaluation. The project involves choosing a particular product, process or theory relevant to biomedical engineering, researching it and justifying its selection. A final report and presentation are required.
509
Introduction to Biomedical Imaging and Applications
Principles of various imaging modalities used in Biomedical engineering applications, including CT, MRI, ultrasound, PET, SPECT. Image processing operations: filtering, enhancement, feature extraction, pattern recognition and image reconstruction. Image registration and integration of different imaging modalities.
511
Biomaterials and Biocompatibility
Basic chemical and mechanical properties of biological and synthetic materials and their role in biological system health, dysfunction, and repair. Role of microstructure, material properties, and biocompatibility aspects in selection of biomaterials for medical or industrial applications. Incorporation of biomimetic concepts in material design. Topics may include artificial and tissue engineered products, implants, prostheses, biofilms, biosensors, and foreign body response.
515
Bioengineering Methods in Systems Biology and Physiology
Concepts from systems theory, differential equations, and stochastic processes applied to physiological and biological systems. Experimental and computational approaches to the study of gene expression and gene networks. Use of quantitative model-based approaches for integrative analysis of physiological and biological functions. Case studies of applications to disease mechanisms and the drug discovery process.
519
Special Topics in Biomedical Engineering
Current topics in Biomedical Engineering.
523
Biomechanics of Movement
Introduction to musculoskeletal biomechanics, including experimental and analytical approaches to the analysis of movement, experimental instrumentation and devices, and joint dynamics. Review of linear algebra. Introduction to three-dimensional rigid body mechanics. Determination of the joint forces and moments. Analysis of the contribution of external loading, forces generated by muscles and constraints provided by other musculoskeletal structures to predict forces in musculoskeletal joints and tissues. Numerical and modelling approaches, including inverse dynamics and optimization, and determination of segmental inertial properties. Applications in orthopaedic engineering, movement assessment, ergonomics and joint injury and replacements.
525
Biomechanics of Tissues
The structure and functional behaviour of complex tissues which make up the human musculoskeletal system (bone, cartilage, muscles, tendons, ligaments) and cardiovascular systems (heart, blood vessels) will be explained by applying basic principles of mechanics as well as continuum mechanics. Introductory topics include: review of linear and tensor algebra, kinematics of continua, deformation gradient, deformation and strain tensors, Cauchy stress tensor and equilibrium, conservation laws, stress power and measures of stress. Constitutive equations for solids and fluids will be introduced as they apply to the study of biological tissues; anisotropy and inhomogeneity, fibre-reinforced non-linear behaviour.
585
Molecular, Cellular and Tissue Engineering
Concepts, calculations, and methodologies in molecular, cellular and tissue engineering will be discussed and applied to solve problems in the areas of molecular diagnostics, pharmaceuticals, nanomedicine and regenerative medicine. Topics include cell biology and culture, stem cells, bioreactors, biomaterials, drug delivery, fluid dynamics, kinetics, and diffusion.
600
Biomedical Engineering Foundations
An introduction to core concepts of Biomedical Engineering including an introduction to biomedical engineering fundamentals. Course allows students to select between a biology focused or an engineering focused fundamental module to complement previous course work (with approval of course instructor).
602
Biomedical Engineering Core I
Topics may include an introduction to a) biomedical engineering research, research integrity and ethics, b) career paths and progression in biomedical engineering and c) oral research communication skills.
604
Biomedical Engineering Core II
Topics may include an introduction to a) research methodology, including experimental design and b) written research communication skills in biomedical engineering, and c) preparation and review of research proposals. Satisfactory completion of this course within one year of first registration will ensure that the Biomedical Engineering Graduate Program Research Proposal requirements are met.
605
Research Seminars in Biomedical Engineering
Reports of studies of the literature or of current research.
607
Research Seminars in Biomedical Engineering
Reports of studies of the literature or of current research.
609
Anatomy and Physiology for Biomedical Engineers
Advanced instruction on human skeletal structure, types of connective tissues, structure of joints, muscle and organ structure and function, cardiac physiology, blood properties and flow, introduction to autonomous nervous system, and disorders of the musculoskeletal system. Other topics will be covered dependent on the interests of the instructor and students.
619
Special Problems in Biomedical Engineering
Designed to provide graduate students, especially at the PhD level, with the opportunity of pursuing advanced studies in particular areas under the direction of a faculty member.
Biostatistics
1
600
Research Seminar
A professional skills course, focusing on the development of technical proficiencies that are essential for students to succeed in their future careers as practicing statistician in academia, government, or industry. The emphasis is on delivering professional presentations and using modern statistical research tools. A high level of active student participation is required.

0
Business and Environment
22
395
Business Law for Strategic Decision-Makers
Business law topics may include: regulatory compliance and environment management, tort and contractual liability, legal issues affecting the strategic management of sole proprietorships, partnerships, corporations and joint ventures, personal liability of corporate directors and officers, intellectual property, advertising and promotion law, consumer protection legislation, legal issues affecting employees and independent contractors, the strategic management of international business, securities law and other current business law issues.
401
Business in Canada
A comparative analysis of Canada's competitive position in the global economy utilizing case studies analyzing strategies employed by Canadian corporations to be successful in world markets.
449
Haskayne Wilderness Retreat
A wilderness intensive retreat combining experiential outdoor activities and personal growth challenges with cross-cultural teachings and ceremonies guided by Indigenous Knowledge Keepers. Delivers core leadership skills for corporate social responsibility in sustainable development.
517
Indigenous Peoples and Sustainable Development
An introduction to indigenous peoples and sustainable development, framed within business ethics relevant to energy and extractive industries. Treaties, government policy and land-use address the duty to consult and accommodate indigenous peoples, emphasizing reconciliation with intercultural competence for indigenous corporate relations and professional capacity building.
533
Dilemmas and Decisions in Business
Managers must balance ethical, social, legal and economic issues while making complex decisions that affect both internal and external stakeholders. Using legal and business case methods as the primary teaching tools, students will, individually and in groups, gain an understanding of how to balance ethical, social and legal decision-making principles, process complex facts and obtain well-reasoned results in order to make decisions in turbulent times.
551
Social Issues, Strategies and Shareholders
An examination of the management of social and environmental issues. A focus on the pressing global issue of climate change and the economic impacts, both threats and opportunities, of greenhouse gas emissions mitigation on energy production and consumption throughout the economy.
555
Strategies for Sustainable Development
Make better business decisions in light of our society, the environment and the economy. Solve social and environmental problems while generating a shareholder return. Practical frameworks for decision making.
559
Selected Topics in Business and Environment
Investigation of selected topics related to business and environment issues.
561
Ethical Issues and the Professional Manager
Major ethical principles are evaluated from different perspectives to provide tools for making sound ethical decisions in various business situations and in the face of moral dilemmas.
595
Advanced Business Law
Various advanced topics that are of current interest in business law. These topics may probe deeper into several of the topics covered in the introductory business law course or may introduce new legal topics of current interest to business managers.
672
Business Communications
Understanding of clear and concise written and verbal communications, development and presentation of a business case, and managing stakeholder expectations through digital and face-to-face techniques.
674
Business Law
Principal substantive subjects include: the administrative and regulatory process, business contracts, employment and labour, business organizations and negligence.
691
Fundamentals of Project Management
Application of management principles to the project environment; planning, control, scope, time and cost processes; project organization and human resource issues. Students review a current major capital project and submit and defend a project report.
719
Project External Issues
Projects will focus on the effects of external factors on business. External factors may include: corporate influences; financial interfaces; sources of funds; lending environment, owner's and lender's risks; government involvement; regulatory requirements; public interfaces; public information; compensation; project commissioning.
749
Rediscovering Leadership: The Haskayne Wilderness Retreat
One-week intensive wilderness retreat combines experiential outdoor activities and personal growth challenges with cross-cultural First Nations teachings and ceremonies to deliver core leadership skills for social responsibility and sustainable development.
751
Strategies for Sustainable Development
The strategic context for making business decisions with respect to sustainable development issues. The role of sustainability in economic development, international trade relations and emerging technologies. Stakeholder perspectives and the effect of environmental and social issues on industrial performance.
753
Managing Social and Environmental Issues in the Global Market Place
Canadian companies operating in the international arena find themselves faced with an increasingly complex array of social and environmental risks that threaten their strategic objectives. This course examines this new class of strategic corporate risks through a review of changes in international sustainable development policy initiatives, changes in communications, the emergence of an environmental and social activist sector, and the interaction of these factors resulting in new international business risk challenges. The course uses lectures, cases, simulations and class discussion of theories and concepts.
761
Ethics and the Professional Manager
The role of values in business decision making; alternative moral codes and their principles; moral principles as decision tools, and reasoning through moral dilemmas; role of business in society; specific issues in business ethics; application through cases and exercises.
777
Global Environment of Business
Economic, political, social and legal factors affecting management decisions. Topics may include Canada in the world economy, business and government relations, business ethics and legal environment for business. Develops knowledge and ability to analyze and deal with complexities of the business environment.
789
Seminar in Business and Environment
Study and discussion of current research literature and contemporary issues on topics related to Business and Environment.
793
Legal Environment of Business
The study of the various areas of business law. Topics may include: contracts, patents and copyrights, product liability, incorporation and other relevant legal issues.
797
Advanced Seminar in Business and Environment

Business Technology Management
24
317
Introduction to Business Technology Management
Focus is on digital business technology management and enterprise applications. Foundation areas include: digital business strategy, strategy alignment, enterprise analysis, IT platforms, data management, business analytics, IT governance, IT innovation, organizational impacts, and economic considerations. Technical skills are developed with an examination of managerial and leadership issues.
321
Information Technology in Business
Introduction to the fundamentals of business technology management and how such systems facilitate business transactions and decision-making at all levels of management. Topics examine the development, organization, management, control, and evaluation of information systems. Societal implications of the use of computer and networking technologies in business are also examined.
331
Data Management and Business Analytics
In today's world, businesses, consumers, and societies create massive amounts of data, by design and as a by-product of their activities. Businesses in every industry are harnessing the power of data to support operations, decision-making, planning, and risk management. Students will focus on organizing, storing, and managing the available data using relational database technologies and generating insights through business analytics techniques.
333
Enterprise Analysis

431
Gathering, Wrangling, and Analyzing Data in R
Introduction to software tools, including R, to clean/organize/analyze data, for graphical analyses, reports, and presentations. Topics include working with API’s, advanced data scraping tools, dynamic and interactive visualizations, and implementations of statistical methods in data analytics. Skills are applied to typical business data sources and case studies with presentations.
455
Business Technology Management Field Project

459
Decision Support Application Development using VBA Programming
Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) is used to create decision support systems and other applications across Microsoft Office Suite applications. Instruction in how to use VBA skills to produce business applications. Focus is on the creation of applications that will allow managers to make meaningful decisions using available data like financial and other industry data from both internal and external sources.
461
IT Platform Management
Technology background related to telecommunications, data communications and IT platforms. Technologies and management issues associated with network models, networking, security and compliance, platform design and competition. Network planning design, integration, implementation, and operation including inter-organizational issues. Current and future issues in organizational implications of telecommunications and IT platform business technologies.
463
Issues in Business Technology Management

465
Enterprise Systems
Exploration of the technologies and issues underlying enterprise systems, enterprise application integration, workflow systems, and information analytics. Focus on strategic, managerial, and technical implications of the use of such systems in organizations. Examination of the current managerial practices for enterprise system design, implementation, and usage.
467
e-Business
Role, management and use of information technologies to enable a range of organizational and business relationships, models and strategies. Topics include developing an IT strategy; digital marketing; customer relationship management (CRM); supply chain management (SCM); planning, developing, and maintaining websites cloud computing; IT platforms; legal, privacy, and security issues; and information technologies for facilitating the use of data, knowledge, and multimedia.
531
Data Analytics Tools for Business
An examination of tools and methods used in data analysis upon which sound business decisions are made. One or more data analysis packages/programs will be used to analyze different types of business data. Statistical and other analytic methods; data mining, machine learning and various techniques, and their application to business data analytics will be explored.
559
Selected Topics in Business Technology Management
Discussion of current or special interest topics in Business Technology Management from a managerial orientation.
601
Business Technology Management
The fundamentals of how to use information technology (IT) innovatively to create competitive firms, to manage global interdependencies, and to provide and support quality products and services efficiently and effectively. Topics covered include trends in IT and how they may affect organizations, how organizations and the value chain can be redesigned using IT to encourage and facilitate better performance, how the Internet and electronic commerce impact organizations and markets, how IT-based platforms drive the network economy.
672
IT Management
Builds a basic understanding of IT infrastructure and how infrastructure influences business processes. The managerial issues associated with IT implementation will be discussed.
674
IT for Value Innovation
Examines organizational IT strategy and business opportunities created by rapidly evolving information technologies.
725
e-Business
The fundamental theories and practices in e-Business. Topics include economic motivations for e-Business, the underlying information technologies and applications that enable e-Business, and e-Business strategies.
731
Data Management and Business Analytics
Covers organizing, storing, and managingavailable data using relational database technologies and generating insights through business analytics techniques.
735
Enterprise Analysis
Course focus is on enterprise analysis and management of IT-enabled solutions to business problems. Emphasis is placed on problem identification, requirements determination, process analysis, enterprise architecture design and IT auditing using the COBIT framework.
736
Data Analytics I
Covers tools and methods used in data analytics to discover, collect, organize, and clean data to make it ready for analysis. Software packages used to clean and organize the data for analysis will be introduced, as well as software to enable users’ understanding of the data that is collected.
737
Data Analytics II
Covers tools and methods used in data analysis. Focus is on analytic and mapping methods, such as data mining, text mining, machine learning, social network analytics and preference mapping, and their application to business data analytics.
743
IT Platform Strategy
Basic characteristics of industries based on network and information goods. Topics include platform-mediated networks, network effects, versioning, pricing, and compatibility, discussed through analytical models and business cases.
797
Advanced Seminar in Business Technology Management

799
Doctoral Seminars in Business Technology Management

Canadian Studies
12
201
Introduction to Canadian Studies
An interdisciplinary examination of the social, cultural, ethnic, political, economic, national, and regional dimensions of Canada, past, present and future.
333
A Comparison of Canadian and American Cultures
An interdisciplinary comparison of Canadian and American cultures and cultural assumptions. A variety of issues and contexts will be dealt with from historical and contemporary perspectives.
337
Introduction to Folklore: The Canadian Context
Introduction to the academic study of folklore: basic terminology, folk groups, performance and applications with examples taken from the Canadian and Albertan context. Introduction to traditional genres of folkloristic expression and analyses of current folk groups and their folklore.
355
Canadian Cities
Canadian urban life from an interdisciplinary perspective.
361
Gender, Race and Ethnicity in Canada
An interdisciplinary introduction to gender, race and ethnicity in Canada to provide an understanding of race, ethnicity and gender as simultaneous and intersecting systems of relationship and meaning.
401
Topics in Canadian Studies
An examination of selected social, cultural, ethnic, economic, political, regional, or national topics in Canadian Studies.
439
Approaches to Canadian Heritage
Examines heritage commemoration, preservation and interpretation by involving students in support projects with local communities.  Projects involve the exploration of presentation methods; the use of oral, artifactual and other evidence in heritage projects; policy and planning issues, the cultural, social, political, ecological and theoretical dimensions of heritage; and the sharing of heritage with the wider public.
451
The Culture of the Calgary Stampede
A particular phenomenon of Calgary - and western Canadian culture - is the Calgary Stampede. In this interdisciplinary course, students will gain an understanding of the rich and complex history, vision and operation of this major western festival.
501
Research in Selected Topics
Supervised individual study of a topic in Canadian Studies.
591
Senior Seminar in Canadian Studies
Advanced level seminar(s) in Canadian Studies, for examination of particular topics of special interest to senior students.
597
Honours Directed Reading
Directed readings for Canadian Studies Honours students in their fourth year.
598
Honours Writing Seminar
Will participate in sessions throughout the year that will normally be facilitated by the Honours Advisor.
Cellular, Molecular and Microbial Biology
26
343
Microbiology
An introductory study of prokaryotes, viruses and immunology with emphasis on systematics, ecology, physiology, molecular biology and roles in pathogenesis of the major groups of prokaryotes.
403
Developmental Biology of Animals
Study of the mechanism of cellular differentiation with emphasis on intra- and intercellular processes.
411
Molecular Genetics
Molecular biology and gene expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Topics include: DNA topology, genome structure, chromatin structure, DNA replication, DNA repair and recombination, mechanisms of transcription and gene expression, post-transcriptional RNA processing, translation.
413
Human Genetics
The principles of genetics as applied to human and medical genetics. Mendelian and multifactorial inheritance of normal and abnormal traits, pedigree analysis, segregation, linkage and gene mapping. Cytogenetics and developmental genetics. Population genetics including inbreeding and evolution in humans. Genetic predisposition to disease.
421
Virology
Comprehensive overview of virus structure and replication; molecular events involved in virus infection and replication including genetics, biochemistry and molecular biology of bacterial, plant and animal viruses. Areas of persistent viruses, viral immunology, cancer and AIDS will be covered.
431
Bacterial Pathogens
An introduction to microbes that cause infections (in humans, other animals and plants.) Topics include: the relationship between pathogen and host, ability of pathogens to colonize, reproduce and cause disease, the role of antibiotics and vaccines in treatment and prevention of infection, antibiotic resistance in bacteria, environmental control of virulence factor production.
443
Microbial Physiology
The focus is structure and function of prokaryotic cells. Topics include cell envelope structure, cell division, transport and secretion, signal transduction, differentiation and development, bacterial growth and energetics, and the diversity of metabolic pathways in Bacteria and Archaea. The laboratory introduces analytical techniques commonly used in bacterial physiology, and some useful biochemical assays.
451
Molecular Analysis of Biological Systems
A laboratory course emphasizing techniques in molecular biology that can be applied to the analysis of problems in cellular, molecular and microbial biology.
461
Functional Genomics and Molecular Networks
Introduction to high-throughput methods for global functional and network analysis of genes and proteins. Topics include microarrays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, synthetic genetic array analysis, next-generation sequencing and network topology.
505
Advanced Developmental Biology
In-depth analyses of the current literature in developmental biology. Emphasis will be on the co-ordinated regulation of gene expression during development.
507
Advanced Topics in Cellular, Molecular and Microbial Biology
Independent Research or reading project that may include seminars, lectures, term papers and training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods.
511
Molecular Biology and Genetics
The concepts of molecular biology as they apply to genetics. Application of current methodology to the understanding of the genetics of prokaryotes, lower and higher eukaryotes (for example: fungi, yeasts, trypanosomes, plants and animals). Genomic organization and function of subcellular organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts will also be considered in detail. The mechanism(s) of regulation of gene expression will be discussed in relation to nuclear as well as organelle genomes.
519
Advanced Cell Biology
In-depth analysis of current literature in cell biology. Topics include subcellular organization and dynamics, cell signalling and differentiation, protein and RNA trafficking, and other aspects of eukaryotic cell biology.
523
DNA Genomes and RNA Function
An examination of information storage and gene expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Biochemical mechanisms of gene expression and regulation in bacteria. Genome sequencing projects and a survey of genome structure and content across domains of life. Topics in eukaryotic gene expression. The diverse roles played by RNA, from information molecules to structural scaffolds to ribozymes.
527
Immunology
Comprehensive overview of the immune system and how immune responses are generated and regulated in the context of infectious diseases. Topics include both fundamental cellular and molecular immunology. Dysregulated responses, such as autoimmunity, immunodeficiencies, transplants, and allergies will also be covered.
528
Independent Studies in Cellular, Molecular and Microbial Biology
Original and independent thought, practical research and the completion of written and oral reports.
530
Honours Research Project in Cellular, Molecular and Microbial Biology
Research project under the direction of one or more faculty members in the Department of Biological Sciences. Formal written and oral reports must be presented on completion of this course. Open only to Honours Cellular, Molecular and Microbial Biology students or Honours Biological Sciences students.
531
Topics in Cellular Interactions
An exploration of selected topics concerning cell-cell interactions and the interactions of cells with their environment during development, differentiation and disease (cancer). Multidisciplinary approaches will be presented, using discussions of seminal research and critical analysis of current literature. Potential topics include cell junctions, cell signaling, cytoskeletal organization, stroma, extracellular matrix remodelling and stem cells and cancer stem cells.
543
Environmental Microbiology
Focuses on understanding the interactions of micro-organisms with their environment. Roles of micro-organisms in nutrient cycling, biological control, and biodegradation will be discussed. The use of molecular approaches to identify and characterize microbial communities, and to understand the precise nature of microbial interactions with abiotic and biotic environments will be emphasized. Special topics will include plant-microbe and animal-microbe symbiosis, extreme environments and biotechnological applications of environmental microbiology.
545
Petroleum Microbiology
Microorganisms can contribute to a more sustainable energy future. Their impact and roles in the fossil fuel industry will be reviewed. Topics will include oilfield souring, biocorrosion, biodegradation, enhanced recovery, upgrading, and bioremediation of contaminated sites.
549
Microbial Genetics
The genetics and genomics of prokaryotes. Topics will include recombination, mechanisms of genetic exchange, analysis of genes and genomes, and genome evolution. Selected current topics in bacterial genetics will also be covered.
561
Cancer Biology
Advances in methodology and in theoretical concepts have permitted continuing breakthroughs in our understanding of the organismal, cellular and molecular biology of cancer cells, and in the development of novel strategies for cancer prevention, diagnosis and treatment. These advances will be presented in a comprehensive overview of cancer including issues of demographics and incidence, causation and detection, origins and progression and therapeutic approaches. Emphasis will be placed on the cell and molecular biology of cancer and on the interaction of the cancer cell with the host organism.
563
Microbial Diversity
An overview of microbial diversity, the evolutionary mechanisms that give rise to it, and the methods used to study it. Topics may include: microbial systematics; characterizing the last universal common ancestor of life; estimating global microbial diversity; “unculturable” microbes and molecular DNA-based methods used to study them in nature; modern cultivation techniques; comparative genomics of microbial species; environmental metagenomics; microbial biogeography and speciation and gene flow in microbial communities.
565
Advanced Topics in Microbial Pathogenesis and the Microbiome
Provides a fuller understanding of bacterial diseases using a systems approach and illustrating key paradigms via the consideration of specific pathogens. Topics include: strategies for bacteria surviving host immune responses, bacterial invasion strategies, opportunistic infections, disease Pathogenesis, and antibiotic resistance, challenges of dealing with emerging infections. Lectures, small group interactive sessions, specified readings.
567
Advanced Topics in Immunology
New and emerging themes in immunology, with an emphasis on disease processes such as inflammation in the gut, kidney and lung. Topics include: innate immunity, the inflammasome, sterile inflammation, process and mechanism of immune cell recruitment in different tissues, T cell biology, B cell biology, regulatory immune cells, mucosal immunity, airways responses to virus, mechanisms of food allergies, inflammatory bowel disease. Lectures, small group interactive sessions, specified readings.
637
Advanced Topics in Molecular Microbiology
Techniques and discussion of recent literature in molecular microbiology. Topics covered will vary from year-to-year, but could include bioinformatics, genomics, mutagenesis, advanced microscopy techniques, proteomics, vectors and cloning techniques, gene expression, and over-expression of proteins, as they relate to the study of prokaryotic systems. Course content will be tailored to the interests of the graduate students enrolled in the class in a given year.
Central and East European Studies
1
313
An Introduction to Cultural Traditions
A survey of Russian and Eastern European cultural history from the settlement of the Slavic peoples to the early twentieth century. Included will be such topics as the ethnic, linguistic, and cultural composition of the region; art and architecture of medieval Russia; the Enlightenment; national revival movements; literature, music and painting; modernism; the cultural efflorescence of the early Soviet period.
Chemical Engineering
54
315
Chemical Engineering Process Calculation
Material and energy balances of physical and chemical systems for steady state and transient conditions. Introduction to analysis and synthesis of chemical processes.
317
Materials Science for Chemical Engineers
Classes of inorganic and polymeric materials and their applications, crystal structure determination, phase diagrams and phase transformation, defects and material properties, materials processing methods, characterization tools for materials engineers, nanotechnology.
331
Process Fluid Dynamics
Fluid Properties; Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids. Fluid statics. Bernoulli equation; derivation and applications. Control volume and system representation. Differential analysis of Flows. The Navier-Stokes equation; applications. Dimensional analysis. Flow in conduits; laminar and turbulent flows; single-pipe and multiple-pipe systems. Forces on immersed bodies; fluidization. Metering.
401
Partial Differential Equations in Transport Processes
Partial differential equations in different co-ordinate systems. Approximate and exact methods of solving equations. Similarity transform, Separation of variables. Laplace transform. Fourier series and Sturm-Liouville systems. Analysis and solution of steady state and transient diffusion problems including Fourier, Darcy and Fick's law analogies. Application to energy transfer in solids and pressure propagation in reservoirs.
403
Heat Transfer
A study of concepts involved in heat transfer. Applications of continuity and energy equations. Boundary layer theory. Conduction, convection and radiation heat transfer. Boiling and condensation. Evaporation. Heat exchanger calculations.
405
Separation Processes I
Diffusion and convective mass transfer. Staged and continuous contacting. Solid-liquid and liquid-liquid extraction, distillation, absorption and stripping.
407
Numerical Methods in Chemical and Oil & Gas Engineering
The theory and use of numerical computational procedures to solve chemical and oil and gas engineering problems. Methods for solution of nonlinear equations, solution of simultaneous linear equations, regression, curve fitting, solution of the algebraic eigenvalue problem, interpolation, differentiation, integration, solution of ordinary differential equations and partial differential equations are included.
421
Chemical Engineering Kinetics
Kinetics of homogeneous reactions and the interpretation of kinetic data; design of single and multiple reactors for simple, simultaneous and consecutive reactions; influence of temperature, pressure and flow on reactions and reactor design; introduction to heterogeneous reaction systems and catalyzed fluid reactions.
423
Chemical Engineering Process Development
Design of chemical processing units and plants; cost estimates and chemical process economics; optimization techniques; introduction to linear programming. Safety and environmental considerations in process design.
427
Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics
Review of first and second law principles; application to the properties of fluids and solutions; vapour liquid equilibria; the third law; applications to chemical equilibrium and chemical reactions.
429
Process Dynamics and Control
Mathematical models describing transient response characteristics of basic process elements; use of a dynamic process simulator; block flow diagram of a feedback control loop; process control hardware; basic control modes; tuning feedback controls; cascade control; feedforward control; common control loops; distillation column control; design of multiple single loop controllers; plant wide modelling and control.
501
Transport Phenomena
Simplification, scaling and dimensional reasoning. Error estimation. Heat, mass and momentum transfer analyses. Convective-Diffusive transport in open and porous media. Systems and process modelling. Analytical solutions by the lumped, integral and differential techniques.
503
Crude Oil Upgrading and Refining
Upgrading objectives; analysis and composition of non-distillable material and its relationship to upgrading; upgrading processes; refinery products and specifications. Conventional, heavy oil and bitumen upgrading technology.
505
Separation Processes II
Concepts in mass transfer including molecular diffusion, mass transfer rates, and mass transfer coefficients. Application of these and other fundamental concepts in chemical engineering to develop process design specifications for various unit operations which may include: crystallization, humidification and cooling, drying, adsorption, and membrane processes.
511
Chemical Process Design I
Team design project applying principles of process engineering and project management; Gantt charts; critical path method; process simulation, degrees of freedom analysis; considerations in process selection; plant location; block flow diagrams; process flow diagrams; short cut process equipment design/sizing procedures; preliminary equipment cost estimating techniques.
519
Special Topics
Current advanced topics in Chemical Engineering.
530
Electrochemical Engineering
Electrochemical kinetics and thermodynamics. Mass transport in electrochemical cells. Design and modelling of electrochemical cells. Application of electrochemistry to fuel cells, batteries, and water treatment.
531
Chemical Process Design II

535
Principles of Biochemical Engineering
Introduction to biochemistry, enzyme kinetics and cell growth and metabolism. Aspects of mass transfer, heat transfer and fluid flow related to the design of biological process equipment. Fermentations, sterilization and extraction techniques. Treatment of effluents. Introduction to bio-reactor design and scale-up. Introduction to process instrumentation and control.
537
Computational Thermodynamics
Amalgamation of thermodynamic models and computational techniques with application to industrially important thermodynamic problems such as multi-component flash calculations, reacting systems, phase stability and gas hydrates.
539
Polymer Engineering
Introduction to polymer science and technology. Molecular structure, processing, rheology, thermal, physical and mechanical properties. Synthetic polymers used in biomedical, manufacturing and other advanced technological applications.
551
Chemical Engineering Laboratory
Experiments which demonstrate the operation of chemical process equipment involving heat and/or mass transfer, or kinetics. Lectures will cover experimental design and applied statistics.
607
Natural Gas Processing Principles
Physical and chemical properties of natural gases; vapour-liquid equilibrium data and computations; flow of gas and gas-liquid mixtures; separation of gaseous mixtures; heat transfer in gas processing; production of natural gas and its associated liquids.
609
Natural Gas Processing Technology
Design and operational criteria in transporting and processing of natural gas; refrigeration and compression; cryogenics; hydrocarbon dew point control; LPG recovery; sulphur recovery; mechanical flow diagrams; process simulation.
613
Advanced Topics in Mass Transfer
Advanced concepts in mass transfer in multiphase systems. Mass transfer with simultaneous chemical reaction and heat transfer.
615
Model Predictive Control
Review of process dynamics and control fundamentals (step response curves, PID control structures and PID controller tuning). Identification of finite impulse response models from plant data. Model Predictive Control (MPC) algorithms (e.g. Dynamic Matrix Control). Applications of Linear Programming to determine optimal MPC setpoints respecting unit constraints. Computer simulation using the MATLAB MPC toolbox. Introduction to univariate controller performance assessment techniques.
617
Modelling and Identification Advanced Control

619
Special Problems
Advanced studies on specialized topics in chemical, petroleum, biochemical and environmental engineering.
620
Graduate Project
Individual project in the student's area of specialization under the guidance of a faculty member. A written proposal, one or more written progress reports, and a final written report are required. An oral presentation is required upon completion of the course. Open only to students in the MEng (course-based) program.
621
Reservoir Simulation
Enhanced recovery modelling (generalized black-oil models, compositional and miscible), well treatment, grid orientation. New developments in gridding, thermal models, naturally fractured reservoirs, modelling of induced fractures (hydraulic and waterflood), reservoir geomechanics, and practical aspects of conducting simulation studies.
623
Chemical Reactor Design
Advanced study of design and operation of chemical reactors for both homogeneous and heterogeneous systems, batch, continuous flow stirred tank, tubular and multibed adiabatic reactors. Cold shot cooling in reactors. Optimal temperature gradients and yields. Catalyst effectiveness factors and optimal control with decaying catalysts. Analysis of sulphur plant reactor design including cost optimization.
625
Advanced Topics in Heat Transfer
Diffusive and convective transport of heat. Analytical and approximate solutions to steady state and transient conduction and convection problems. Superposition techniques. Forced convection of heat in laminar and turbulent regimes.
627
Chemical Process Simulation
Object oriented programming applied to the design of a steady state chemical process simulator via the sequential modular approach and by the equation-based approach. Material and energy balances for systems of process units.
629
Secondary and Tertiary Recovery
Displacement processes for improved recovery of hydrocarbons. Waterflooding, gas flooding, solvent flooding and chemical flooding. Performance prediction techniques. Comparative economics.
630
Electrochemical Engineering
Electrochemical kinetics and thermodynamics. Mass transport in electrochemical cells. Design and modelling of electrochemical cells. Application of electrochemistry to fuel cells, batteries, and water treatment.
631
Advanced Topics in Fluid Mechanics
Constitutive equations for viscous flow and methods of solution. Laminar, transition and turbulent flows. Hydrodynamic stability. Vortices. Boundary layers.
633
Chemical Thermodynamics
Advanced application of thermodynamic principles. Calculation of thermodynamic properties; ideal and non-ideal solution theory; calculation of phase equilibria; properties of reacting mixtures.
639
Applied Numerical Methods in Engineering
Numerical solution of systems of linear and non-linear algebraic equations, eigenvalue problems. Numerical solution of systems of ordinary and partial differential equations. Initial value and boundary value problems. Finite difference and finites element methods. Numerical stability.
643
Air Pollution Control Engineering
Introduction to air quality and air pollution. Energy and air pollution. Fossil fuel combustion and related air pollution. Industrial air pollution control. Control of particulate matter. Control of VOCs, SOx, and NOx. Adsorption, absorption and biofiltration of air pollutants. GHG emission control. Recent advances on related topics.
645
Industrial and Produced Wastewater Treatment
Sources and characterization of industrial wastewater. Treatment objectives and regulations. Unit and process design. Physical/chemical treatment including sedimentation, coagulation, filtration, absorption, adsorption, ion exchange, membrane processes and pH adjustment.
647
Thermal Recovery Methods
Oil sands and heavy oil resources. Fluid and rock properties. Heat transfer processes in porous media. Comparative analysis of viscous oil recovery methods: steam flooding, cyclic steam stimulation, in-situ combustion and steam-assisted-gravity-drainage. Surface equipment and operation. Laboratory and field performance evaluation of thermal recovery methods. Process economics.
649
Naturally Fractured Reservoirs
Classification and characterization of naturally fractured reservoirs. Drilling and completion methods. Production characteristics. Tight gas reservoirs. Reserve estimation. Emphasis is placed on the relationship between geology, log interpretation, well testing, and primary-secondary recovery of hydrocarbons from naturally fractured reservoirs.
653
Horizontal Wells for Petroleum Production
Drilling and completion methods for horizontal wells; mathematical analysis of steady state flow to horizontal wells and well combinations; pseudo steady state and constant well bore pressure models; theoretical comparisons of predicted performance and coning behaviour of horizontal and vertical well patterns; performance in fractured reservoirs; potential for horizontal wells in heavy oil and bitumen production; basic conceptual ideas of steam-assisted gravity drainage.
657
Advanced Reservoir Engineering
Formulation and solution of reservoir-engineering problems including combination of variables, Laplace transform, approximate Integral methods, and solution methods of moving boundary problems. Examples from thermal processes (e.g. hot waterflooding, SAGD), different recovery mechanisms (e.g. imbibition, expansion drive, solution-gas drive), well testing problems and naturally fractured reservoirs.
659
Advanced Cell and Tissue Engineering
Current challenges in tissue engineering. Focus on specific tissues. Course topics include a brief biology review, cell fate processes, stem cells, tissue microenvironments and mass transfer, biomaterials, bioreactors, and clinical delivery of tissue engineered constructs.
661
Geostatistics for Reservoir Characterization
Statistical/probability concepts, exploratory data analysis, spatial structural analysis, estimation theory (Kriging), integration of auxiliary information and conditional stochastic simulation. Special emphasis on reservoir characterization and the particular problems encountered in that area. The geostatistical methodology for reservoir characterization will be demonstrated on a fluvial reservoir example.
665
Wastewater Issues for the Oil and Gas Industry
Produced water characteristics, regulations governing produced water management, management options. Technologies used for produced water treatment, novel/emerging technologies. Process design approaches and comparative evaluation of various technologies. Case Studies.
677
Advanced Oil and Gas Engineering
Problems related to production of conventional oil, heavy oil and natural gas; analysis of the interactions of oil, water and gas, effects of fluid properties, rock structure and capillary, gravity and viscous forces acting on the reservoir system; application to the design of improved oil and gas recovery methods. New processes in oil and gas recovery.
687
Petroleum Economics
Economic principles and risk management practices in the petroleum industry. Project selection; investment ranking; budgeting; and portfolio development. Decision making under uncertainty and risk.
689
Drilling Advances, Modelling and Simulation
Application of drilling optimization simulator tools to optimize rate of penetration and minimize cost. Drilling hydraulics simulation, directional drill string torque and drag calculations, drilling fluid selection and analysis and real time drilling rate analysis.
698
Reservoir Characterization for Field Development
A team-based, integrated reservoir description experience working with geophysical, geological, petrophysical, and engineering data to produce a field development plan.
699
Special Project
Project study conducted under the guidance of a faculty member and intended to expose the student to the tools, techniques and basic aspects of research. A written comprehensive report and one or more written progress reports are required.
701
Experimental Design and Error Analysis
Statistical analysis and design of engineering experiments. Random variables and sampling distributions; estimation and hypothesis testing; concepts of central tendency, variability, confidence level; correlation, regression and variation analysis; robust estimation; experiments of evaluation; experiments of comparison; factorial experiments (analysis of variance); experimental designs (involving randomization, replication, blocking and analysis of covariance).
703
Advanced Mathematical Methods in Engineering
Review of theory of linear algebra. Review of ordinary differential equations: linear, non-linear; series solutions; special exact solutions; applications. Partial differential equations: geometric interpretation; characteristic curves; separation of variables; the Sturm-Liouville problem and Fourier series; eigenfunction expansion; Fourier, Laplace and Hankel transforms; self-similarity; Green's function; applications.
Chemistry
61
201
General Chemistry: Structure and Bonding
An introduction to university chemistry from theoretical and practical perspectives, that focuses on an exploration of the fundamental links between electronic structure, chemical bonding, molecular structure and the interactions of molecules using inorganic and organic examples.
203
General Chemistry: Change and Equilibrium
An introduction to university chemistry from theoretical and practical perspectives that focuses on an exploration of the fundamental links between kinetics, equilibria and thermodynamics and explores acidity/basicity and redox behaviour using inorganic and organic examples.
209
General Chemistry for Engineers
Basic chemical concepts. Atomic and molecular structure. Chemical bonding. Chemical kinetics and equilibria. Acid-base and solubility equilibria. Oxidation-reduction phenomena and electrochemistry. The chemistry of water. The chemistry of energy sources. Basic environmental issues.
211
Foundations of Chemistry: Structure and Bonding

213
Foundations of Chemistry: Change and Equilibrium

301
The Chemical World
The focus is on developing a general awareness and appreciation of the chemistry all around us; where chemical principles are surveyed in a variety of current and everyday contexts.
311
Analytical Chemistry: Quantitative Analysis
Lectures: Principles and practice of precision measurement in chemistry. Statistical treatment of data. Acid-base and oxidation-reduction equilibria. Complexometric analysis. Laboratory: Quantitative analysis of organic and inorganic materials.
315
Analytical Chemistry: Introductory Instrumental Analysis
Lectures: Principles and practice of instrumental measurements for the quantitative determination of substances. Spectroscopic analysis. Analytical separations: liquid-liquid extraction, solid phase extraction, chromatography. Electrochemical methods: potentiometry, voltammetry, coulometry. Automated methods of analysis. Laboratory: Quantitative analysis of organic and inorganic materials using simple instrumental techniques.
321
Environmental Chemistry
A survey course of major aspects of environmental chemistry including the natural chemical cycles in the biosphere, geosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere and the consequences of anthropogenic disturbances to these cycles. Topics discussed will include: Aquatic Chemistry and water pollution. Atmospheric Chemistry and its alteration. Soil Chemistry and the fate of pollutants. Hazardous waste. Toxicological Chemistry.
351
Organic Chemistry I
An introduction to Organic Chemistry from a mechanistic perspective. Structure, bonding, and function, e.g. physical properties and reactivity. Stereochemistry; kinetics and thermodynamics. Spectroscopy (nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared, ultra-violet/visible, and mass spectrometric techniques). Substitution and elimination reactions of saturated functional groups - the chemistry of alkanes, alkyl halides, alcohols and their derivatives. Laboratory: Practical techniques.
353
Organic Chemistry II
The concept and implications of aromaticity. The reactions of unsaturated functional groups via substitution, elimination and addition mechanisms - the chemistry of alkenes, alkynes, aromatics, aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids and their derivatives. Laboratory: Characteristic functional group reactivity, synthesis, and qualitative organic analysis.
355
Organic Chemistry II (for Chemists)
Mechanisms and synthetic applications of the reactions of alkenes, alkynes, aromatics, carbonyl compounds, carboxylic acids and derivatives, and conjugated systems such as 1, 3-dienes and enones. The concept of aromaticity and its effect on chemical behaviour. Laboratory: Emphasis on organic synthesis and the methods of qualitative organic analysis.
357
Industrial Organic Chemistry for Engineers
The hybridization of the carbon atom and covalent bonding. Typical reactions of alkanes, alkenes, alkynes and industrial applications. Substitution; halogenation, nitration and oxidation of aromatic hydrocarbons; polymerization and industrial applications. Functional groups and their reactions; oxidation, reduction, addition and elimination reactions, and industrial applications.
371
Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics Chemistry
Lectures: A study of the states of matter. The basic laws of thermodynamics and their applications. Development of the concept of chemical potential. Changes of state and phase diagrams of pure substances and mixtures. Equilibrium electrochemistry. Laboratory: Experimental measurements, interpretations, and calculations relating to the topics discussed in lectures.
373
Physical Chemistry: Quantum Chemistry
Lectures: Elementary quantum mechanical treatment of the energy levels of atoms and molecules. Atomic spectra. Symmetry elements, operations, and point groups. Laboratory: Experimental measurements, interpretations, and calculations relating to the topics discussed in lectures.
379
Materials Chemistry for Engineers
An introduction to materials chemistry with industrial applications. Theories of chemical bonding and the relationship between chemical structure and observable properties. Chemical and physical properties of mixtures and interfaces. Structure and applications of polymers and soft materials.
402
Introduction to Research in Chemistry

409
Applied Chemistry and Chemical Pathways for Engineers
Analysis of industrial chemical processes based on reaction pathways to infer system performance including co-product formation and the role of catalysts. Examples from oil, gas, coal and petrochemical processing.
417
Modern Chromatographic Analysis
Fundamental concepts and methods of chromatographic separation science: Partition theory, sample preparation, chromatographic theory, gas and liquid chromatography, principles of detection. Emerging concepts such as micro-fluidic separation platforms, column technology and novel mobile phases.
423
Green Chemistry: Principles and Techniques
Green Chemistry focuses on the science and techniques that chemists and chemical and process engineers use to generate less waste, and to develop products and processes that are more atom- and energy-efficient, environmentally sensitive, and cost-effective. A look at the principles behind green chemistry, some techniques and processes used in achieving atom- and energy-efficiency, and waste reduction.
425
Industrial Chemistry
Electrochemical processes and the applications of some of their products. Unit operations and reactor types in the chemical industry. Petroleum refining including heavy oil and bitumen. Industrial organic synthesis including monomers for subsequent polymerization. Design of specialized polymers.
431
Inorganic Chemistry: Main Group Elements
Lectures: The structure of many-electron atoms. Bonding, stereochemistry and symmetry in inorganic compounds. Solid-state science and aspects of inorganic solution chemistry. The chemistry of the main group elements. Laboratory: Applications of chemical principles to inorganic synthetic and qualitative analytical problems.
433
Inorganic Chemistry: Transition Metals
Lectures: Bonding models for metals and for transition metal compounds. Interpretation of redox and thermodynamic properties based on ligand field theory. Coordination and organometallic compounds of the transition metals. Metal complexes as catalysts in industry and biology. Laboratory: Synthesis, analysis, and physical investigations of transition metal compounds which illustrate their important properties.
453
Advanced Organic Chemistry
Introduction to molecular orbital (MO) theory. Pericyclic reactions, the Woodward-Hoffmann rules. Photochemistry. Elucidation of reaction mechanism, and reactive intermediates. Laboratory: Multi-step synthesis and computer modelling of organic reactions.
471
Physical Chemistry: Kinetics and Spectroscopy
Vibrational, electronic and magnetic resonance spectra. Reaction kinetics and transport properties in the gas phase and in solution. Catalysis. Laboratory: Experimental measurements, interpretations, and calculations relating to the topics discussed in lectures.
502
Research in Chemistry
Comprehensive research project under the direction of a staff member. A research report must be presented on completion of the course, and attendance at a weekly research seminar is expected.
515
Advanced Instrumental Analysis
Lectures: Fundamental aspects of modern instrumental methods. Spectroscopic methods: UV-visible and atomic absorption spectroscopy, flame and plasma emission methods. Chromatographic methods; liquid and gas chromatography. Mass spectrometry. Laboratory: Analysis of inorganic and organic samples using spectroscopic, electrochemical, and chromatographic instrumental methods.
521
Introduction to Atmospheric Chemistry
An introduction to Tropospheric and Stratospheric Chemistry. The detailed chemistry of the stratosphere and troposphere. Gas-phase chemical kinetics. Photochemistry and atmospheric radiation. Aerosols. Anthropogenic pollution and air quality. Climate forcing. Introduction to modelling and atmospheric transport.
531
Advanced Inorganic Chemistry: Transition Metals
Co-ordination and organometallic chemistry of the transition elements, incorporating the lanthanoids and actinoids. Fundamental and applied aspects, including characterization techniques, reaction mechanisms, catalysis and bioinorganic chemistry.
533
Advanced Inorganic Chemistry: Main Group Elements
Chemistry of the s- and p-block elements. Interpretation of nuclear magnetic resonance, electron paramagnetic resonance, vibrational and mass spectra. Fundamental concepts and industrial uses of inorganic heterocycles and polymers, electron-deficient and organometallic compounds. Solid-state chemistry.
535
Advanced Inorganic Laboratory
Advanced laboratory techniques for the synthesis and characterization of main group compounds, organometallics and solid-state materials using modern spectroscopic and structural methods. Includes a short project.
541
Concepts in Biochemical Toxicology
An interdisciplinary course focused on the diverse biomolecular mechanisms by which organic (e.g. PCB’s) and inorganic pollutants (e.g. Cd, Hg, As) adversely affect cell function examined at multiple levels of organization, from molecules to whole organisms. Topics include how natural toxins exert toxicity, how toxins/light generate free radicals within cells, how the speciation of metals in the environment affects their bioavailability/toxicity, and the toxicity mechanisms that lead to homeostatic dysfunction.
551
Organic Synthesis
Concepts and strategies of synthesizing molecules with emphasis on carbon-carbon bond-forming reactions, protecting groups, chemo-, regio- and stereoselectivity.
553
Bio-organic Chemistry
Organic chemistry applied to the understanding of biomolecules: Selected topics from carbohydrate, peptide/protein, lipid and nucleoside chemistry, enzyme inhibition and drug design.
555
Advanced Organic Laboratory
Advanced laboratory techniques: Methods of purification and identification of products, purification of reagents, experimental design, working with air/moisture sensitive reagents. Includes a short research project.
559
Organic Spectroscopy
The instrumentation, theory and practical aspects of spectroscopy (e.g. UV/vis, MS, IR, 1H and 13C NMR including 2D-techniques). The emphasis will be on the application for structural elucidation through a problem solving approach.
571
Physical Chemistry of Interfaces
The chemical and electrical nature, as well as basic thermodynamics, of interfaces. Surface films and aqueous interfaces, including micelles and bilayers. Interfaces involving solids such as metals and semiconductors. Absorption phenomena and surface catalysis. Survey of experimental approaches for interfacial studies.
573
Nature of the Condensed Phase in Chemistry
Theoretical models of liquids and solids. Dielectric continuum, polarizabilities and magnetism. Ionic crystal, insulators, conductors, semiconductors and super conductors. Some aspects of scattering techniques for structure determination.
575
Advanced Electronic Structure Theory
A discussion of the theories of modern electronic structure illustrated by applications to molecular structure and bonding, electronic spectroscopy, as well as chemical reactivity and dynamics.
579
Surface and Colloid Chemistry for Engineers
Introduces the fundamental and applied aspects of interfacial phenomena including capillarity, surface and interfacial tension, films, wetting and contact angles, adsorption, micellization, solubilization and emulsification. Examples drawn from colloids, foams, aerosols and macromolecules.
599
Selected Topics in Chemistry
Selected topics are offered based on the interests of Chemistry faculty and students.
601
Research Seminar
Reports on studies of the literature or of current research. Required of all graduate students in Chemistry.
603
Research Seminar

613
Electrochemical Fundamentals and Methodologies
Origin, significance, and thermodynamics of interfacial potential differences; structure of the double layer; basic principles of electron transfer at interfaces, Butler-Volmer equation; mass transport control of electro-chemical reactions; controlled potential methods as applied to electrode surface reactions and homogeneous reactions coupled to electron-transfer processes.
615
Analytical Separations
Theory and practice of resolving mixtures into separate components for analysis. Basic theory; liquid-liquid extraction; high performance liquid chromatography; gas-liquid, open bed, ion exchange and exclusion chromatography; electrophoresis.
617
Advanced Analytical Chemistry
Consideration of principles and equilibria pertaining to aqueous and nonaqueous neutralization, redox, complexation, precipitation and potentiometric methods employed in analyses. Statistical considerations of analytical data and analysis.
619
Selected Topics in Analytical Chemistry
Topics of current interest such as: properties of synthetic polymer membranes, advanced instrumental methods, developments in chemical sensors, speciation studies, environmental analytical chemistry.
621
Organometallic Chemistry
A detailed discussion of structure, bonding and preparative methods in organometallic chemistry including the industrial and synthetic applications of organometallic compounds.
623
Chemistry of the Main Group Elements
The chemistry of electron-deficient, electron-precise, and electron-rich rings, inorganic polymers, and organometallic compounds of the main group elements; applications of spectroscopic techniques; industrial uses. Seminars on recent research developments.
627
Theoretical Inorganic Chemistry
Aspects of theoretical inorganic and organometallic chemistry including: quantitative and qualitative molecular orbital theory; the bonding and structure of molecules, clusters, and extended arrays; the fragments of organometallic species; orbital correlation diagrams in inorganic reactions; spectroscopic methods and their interpretation.
629
Selected Topics in Inorganic Chemistry
Courses are offered to cover topics of current interest, such as bioinorganic chemistry, inorganic solution phenomena, and the inorganic chemistry of the solid state.
641
Concepts in Biochemical Toxicology
An interdisciplinary course focused on the diverse biomolecular mechanisms by which organic (e.g. PCB’s) and inorganic pollutants (e.g. Cd, Hg, As) adversely affect cell function examined at multiple levels of organization, from molecules to whole organisms. Topics include how natural toxins exert toxicity, how toxins/light generate free radicals within cells, how the speciation of metals in the environment affects their bioavailability/toxicity, and the toxicity mechanisms that lead to homeostatic dysfunction.
651
Advanced Organic Stereochemistry
Stereochemical principles in organic chemistry, including: geometry, bonding, symmetry, molecular isomerism, conformational analysis, asymmetric and stereocontrolled reactions.
653
Advanced Organic Spectroscopy

655
Advanced Organic Synthesis
A review of modern synthetic reactions and methods in the field of organic chemistry with emphasis on the recent literature.
657
Theoretical Organic Chemistry
Theoretical principles of organic chemistry including stereochemistry, molecular orbital calculations, pericyclic processes (Woodward-Hoffmann rules), and PMO theory.
659
Selected Topics in Organic Chemistry
Courses are offered in major branches of organic chemistry, including: carbohydrate chemistry, steroids and terpenoids, semiochemistry, heterocyclic chemistry, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, as well as other topics of current interest.
669
Selected Topics in Applied Chemistry
Courses are offered in such topics as electrochemistry, industrial catalysis, chemistry of energy sources, colloid and surface chemistry and polymer chemistry.
681
Crystallography
A general introduction to X-ray analysis of single crystals. Topics include: Geometry of the crystalline state; diffraction of X-rays; Fourier synthesis; methods of structure solution; accuracy and precision of derived parameters.
689
Selected Topics in Physical Chemistry
Courses are offered in such topics as dielectric properties, kinetics, molecular vibrations, fluorescence spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction.
701
Independent Study
Independent study not directly related to the student's thesis project normally under the direction of any chemistry faculty member. A course information sheet must be provided and a student report must be submitted on completion of the course.
Chinese
24
205
Beginners' Chinese I
Basic concepts of the Chinese National Language. Reading and writing of characters, essentials of grammar, basic vocabulary, and oral drills on normal speech patterns.
207
Beginners' Chinese II

229
Intensive Beginners' Chinese
Intensive development of conversational skills and the pronunciation of the Chinese National Language. Enhanced training in vocabulary acquisition, grammar and writing. For students with a background in a Chinese dialect.
279
Reading and Writing Chinese
Introduction to the Chinese language for students who have a background in Mandarin and other Chinese dialects, but limited reading and writing ability. Students will learn to read and write characters, and acquire the essentials of basic vocabulary and grammar.
301
Continuing Chinese I

303
Continuing Chinese II

309
Chinese Culture in an Immersion Setting
An introduction to contemporary Chinese culture and functional Chinese language.
311
Chinese Language in an Immersion Setting I
A course in Chinese stressing the oral skills in an immersion environment.
313
Chinese Language in an Immersion Setting II

317
Topics in Chinese Civilization

331
Intermediate Chinese I
An intermediate course giving equal emphasis to receptive and productive language skills.
333
Intermediate Chinese II

341
Introduction to Chinese Literature
Introduction to Chinese literature through the reading and discussion of selected literary works.
353
Introduction to Chinese Language and Linguistics
An overview of Chinese linguistics. Provides an introduction to linguistic concepts and topics to enhance understanding of the structure of the Chinese language.
355
Topics in Chinese Literature in Translation
Introduces the literary tradition of China by means of reading the English translations of representative works. Examines the historical and cultural background, as well as literary forms and aesthetics.
357
Topics in Chinese Film

363
Chinese Language in the Cultural Context
Study of the use and function of the Chinese language in its cultural context.
371
Classical Chinese I
An introduction to the grammar and vocabulary of the classical Chinese language. Readings of short texts selected from famous classical works.
373
Classical Chinese II
Further study of grammar and vocabulary of classical Chinese language. Readings of short texts selected from famous classical works.
401
Advanced Chinese Conversation
Development of Chinese oral communication skills through contemporary film, television programs and/or other audio materials with textbooks.
403
Advanced Readings and Writing in Modern Chinese
Development of Chinese reading and writing skills through newspapers, magazines, social commentary and/or literary works.
431
Selected Topics in Chinese Literature
Selected readings from various literary topics, such as contemporary Chinese literature, the Chinese diaspora experience, readings of specific authors.
461
Japanese-Chinese Cultural Relations
Discussion of cultural relations and influences between Japan and China. Topics may include cultural identities and cross-influences, literary and artistic traditions, writing systems.
561
Research Seminar
Engages senior students as members of a collaborative research team. Independent research, discussion, group presentations.
Civil Engineering
66
317
Mechanics of Solids
Axial-force, shear-force and bending-moment diagrams; stress and strain; stress-strain relations; elastic and plastic behaviour; elastic constants; simple statically indeterminate (one-degree) problems; review of moment of inertia, product of inertia and principal axes of inertia; elastic torsion of circular shafts; elastic and plastic bending about principal axes of beams with symmetrical cross-section; composite beams; shear stresses due to bending; Mohr's circle for stress; thin-walled pressure vessels; deflection of beams by integration; Euler buckling.
337
Tools for Civil Engineering Design
A course utilizing computer tools to solve practical Civil Engineering problems. The course concentrates upon the use of spreadsheets, but also involves interaction with databases, computer graphics and computer programming for analysis, design and reporting. Problems will normally be derived from several core Civil Engineering sub-disciplines.
402
Hydraulics
Quantitative and qualitative investigation of pipe flow and free-surface fluid flow. Application of fundamental laws of mechanics to fluid flow, including conservation of mass, momentum, and energy. Use of theoretical and numerical analysis methods. Review of basic concepts of fluid motion; pressurized pipe network flow; open channel flow; uniform and non-uniform flow.
413
Introduction to Civil Engineering Materials
Engineering properties, materials science and applications of Civil Engineering materials: strength, elasticity, fatigue, creep, shrinkage, durability, thermal deformation; introduction to fracture mechanics; microstructure and fundamental principles underlying performance; mass transport processes, corrosion and phase transformations causing deterioration. Practical examples from difference materials sectors: steel, aggregates, cement, Portland cement concrete, masonry, asphalt concrete, natural and synthetic polymers.
423
Geotechnical Engineering I
Identification and classification of soils; soil compaction; seepage; effective stress concept; stresses in a soil mass; settlement; one dimensional consolidation; shear stress and strength; introduction to slope stability; selected laboratory and design exercises with computer applications.
451
Structural Engineering I
Review of analysis of statically determinate and indeterminate structures. Structural building materials; principles of structural analysis and design process; loads on structures; structural systems; idealized models; load paths for gravity lateral loads; structural safety; philosophy of limit states design. Design principles for main structural members in steel, plain and reinforced concrete/masonry, and timber.
461
Mechanics of Solids and Structures
Analysis of statically determinate structures: reactions, member forces in trusses, bending moment, shearing force and axial force diagrams for frames; introduction to indeterminate structures; effects of moving loads, influence lines, Muller-Breslau principle; determination of displacements using moment area theorems, energy theorems and virtual work; Maxwell's theorem; normal stresses in non-symmetric sections; principal axes, shear centre; plastic torsion of circular shafts, torsion of non-circular sections; principal stresses, failure theories; elastic buckling of columns.
471
Project Management I
Introduces techniques that provide rational solutions to a range of project management decision-making problems encountered in engineering projects. Students are expected to gain a detailed understanding of some of the techniques, tools and processes available and their application in planning and managing engineering and construction projects. The course covers project management fundamentals including project planning and scheduling techniques, cash flow forecasting, performance evaluations and decision analysis. Introduction to operations research.
473
Transportation Engineering I

481
Environmental Engineering I
Analyze and develop civil engineering solutions, at a conceptual level, to human health and environmental problems associated with human activities; fundamental aspects of air, water and land pollution; water quality assessment and control; environmental aspects of non-renewable energy development; introduction to sustainability concepts in construction and transportation; solid waste management technologies; introduction to land pollution prevention and control.
502
Civil Engineering Aspects of Sustainable Communities
Definition of sustainability; global urbanization; emissions from transportation systems; economics of urban development from a civil infrastructure point of view, water/wastewater, land use/transportation; public transportation; travel demand management for sustainability; construction industry - energy use and emissions.
504
Uncertainty Concepts in Civil Engineering
Fundamentals of uncertainty, risk, reliability and decision making in Civil Engineering applications. Probability as a measure of uncertainty based on frequency data, least presumptive methods and use of odds; Bayes’ Theorem; known probability distributions and how they apply to civil engineering problems. Advanced topics including applications of extreme value distributions, joint probability distributions and stochastic optimization. Risk as a function of both probability and disutility. Risk analysis through Bayesian Decision Theory.
508
Environmental Aspects of Energy
Environmental assessment and management in the energy sector. Ecological footprint introduction. Site investigation, field techniques and program implementation; remedial planning and design; cost and time analysis; physical, chemical and biological remediation techniques; biomass and waste to energy; energy use and emissions in transportation systems; energy efficiencies and emissions in building construction; assess problems with energy use from an environmental setting; develop and apply engineered solutions; ecological and environmental footprints of energy industries.
513
Structural Concrete Design
Structural systems for buildings. Flexural design in reinforced concrete. Design of continuous beams and one-way slabs using moment coefficients. Shear design. Bond and development. Serviceability. Two-way slab and flat plate systems: direct design method, punching shear. Biaxially loaded and long columns. Walls: laterally loaded walls, bearing walls, shear walls. Footings: wall footings, isolated footings. Pre-stressed concrete: introduction, elastic analysis, deflections, flexural and shear strength. Use of computer programs where applicable.
523
Geotechnical Engineering II
Sub-surface investigations; soil shear strength, critical states and laboratory tests; shallow and deep foundations in sands and clays; bearing capacity and settlement of structures; lateral earth pressures and retaining structures; seepage analysis; slope stability analysis, selected laboratory design exercises, solution to slope stability and other problems using computer programs.
551
Structural Engineering II
Review of analysis of statically determinate structures. Static and kinematic indeterminacy. Principle of superposition. The force/flexibility and displacement/stiffness methods for the analysis of statically indeterminate structures. Calculation of displacements. Inelastic buckling of columns. Use of computers for the analysis of plane frames and grids. Plastic analysis of continuous beams, frames and plates. Yield line theory.
557
Structural Steel Design
Principles of limit states design of steel structures. Floor systems; resistance to horizontal forces. Properties of steel. Tension members. Eccentrically-loaded bolted and welded connections; connection details. Axially-loaded compression members. Laterally unsupported beams. Members subjected to bending and axial forces; beam-column effect. Composite beams. Plate girders. Design of a simple steel structure and use of available computer software to assist in analysis and design of steel structures.
565
Project Management II

570
Group Design Project

571
Introduction to Road Safety
Theory and evidence in accident analysis and prevention. Topics include Haddon's matrix, crash data analysis, traffic enforcement, road safety advertising, fleet safety, road safety audits, vehicle safety and program evaluation.
575
Transportation Engineering II

581
Environmental Engineering II

595
Special Topics
Current topics in Civil Engineering.
597
Civil Engineering Project I
Individual work on an assigned Civil Engineering topic under the supervision of a faculty member. The project will normally involve a literature review, theoretical and laboratory or field work. Submission of a mid-term progress report defended orally and a final report.
611
Bituminous Materials
Origin of bituminous materials. Production, composition, and internal structure. Natural and petroleum-refined bituminous materials. Characteristics of bituminous materials and their measurement. Basic material and rheological tests. Application of bituminous materials in asphalt paving technologies. Hot mixes and asphalt emulsions. Paving mix design, properties and testing. Main failure modes of asphalt pavements. Industrial asphalts. Environmental impacts of asphalt technologies.
615
Rheology of Engineering Materials
Elements of tensor calculus. Constitutive equations. Linear and non-linear viscoelasticity. Dielectric properties of materials. Rheometry. Temperature and molecular mass dependencies of material functions. Relations between material functions. Microstructure and rheology of materials.
617
Fracture of Civil Engineering Materials
Cohesive strength; plasticity. Fracture mechanics in relation to structural steel, stress intensity, fracture toughness, energy release rate, LEFM, COD, J-Integral, R-Curve, fatigue. Compressive fracture of concrete, masonry and rocks; cracking patterns, fracture theories, damage models, test methods and effects.
619
Special Problems
Designed to provide graduate students, especially at the PhD level, with the opportunity of pursuing advanced studies in particular areas under the direction of a faculty member. Students would be required to consider problems of an advanced nature.
621
Computer Analysis of Structures
Review of the displacement method of structural analysis, energy theorems, and transformation of force and displacement matrices. Computer analysis of framed structures: banded stiffness matrices, assemblage of stiffness matrices, displacement and support conditions and calculation of reactions, solution of banded equations. Structural symmetry, anti-symmetry and cyclic symmetry. Analysis of large structures by substructuring. Analysis of shear wall structures. Introduction to the finite element method: displacement functions, stiffness matrix formulation, consistent load vectors, isoparametric elements. Non-linear analysis: effect of axial forces combined with large displacements, geometric stiffness matrix, Newton-Raphson techniques, examples of geometric non-linearity, non-linear buckling, cable networks including membrane elements, analysis of structures made of non-linear materials. Structuring and composition of available structural analysis computer programs, and their applications.
623
Behaviour and Design of Reinforced Concrete Members
Behaviour and strength of reinforced concrete members; materials; safety; design of members subjected to flexure, compression, compression and flexure including biaxial bending, shear, torsion; bond and anchorage; slender columns; deep beams; serviceability; rotation capacity; relation between results of research and current design codes.
627
Serviceability of Concrete Structures: Advanced Topics
Material properties affecting serviceability: creep and shrinkage of concrete and relaxation of prestressed steel. Displacement method of analysis of strains and stresses due to temperature, creep and shrinkage; composite sections; cracked sections. Time-dependent internal forces; effects of loading, prestressing and construction in stages. Displacements of cracked members; crack spacing; stabilized cracks; force-induced and displacement-induced cracking. Deflections of beams, frames, slabs and floor systems. Non-linear effects of cracking on internal forces. Effects of temperature. Fatigue of cracked prestressed members. Corrosion; effects of cracking. Serviceability considerations of miscellaneous structures, e.g., bridges, water-retaining structures and pavements.
629
Computational Modelling of Concrete Structures
Discussion of linear finite element analysis; non-linear analysis and iterative techniques; constitutive relations and failure theories; modelling of reinforcement and prestressing; cracking models and post-cracking behaviour; tension stiffening and strain softening; models for shear transfer; time-dependent effects of creep, shrinkage and temperature; behaviour under cyclic loading and dynamic effects; numerical examples and computer applications on analysis of beams, frames, slabs, shear panels and walls, thin shells, axisymmetric solids and three dimensional structures.
633
Fibre Reinforced Polymers for Construction and Repair of Structures
Properties and behaviour of various types of Fibre-Reinforced Polymers (FRP) materials. Limit States Design, procedures and design philosophy of structures reinforced or strengthened with FRP. Flexural and shear design. FRP systems for flexural and shear strengthening of structures. Axial strengthening of columns. Concrete prestressed with FRP. Durability and fire resistance, blast mitigation and repair using FRP. Case studies and field applications.
635
Behaviour and Design of Prestressed Concrete Bridges and Other Structures
Forces due to prestressing in statically indeterminate structures such as continuous beams, frames, slabs, using load balancing method, force method and prestressing influence coefficients. Limit analysis of continuous prestressed concrete structures. Design of prestressed flat slabs. Initial and time-dependent deflections. Effect of creep and shrinkage in statically indeterminate structures; effect of differential settlement; creep behaviour of structures made continuous by cast-in situ concrete. Discussion of various types of prestressed concrete bridges; selection of cross-section, pier arrangement, abutments, approach slab, bearings. Loads. Design of skew and curved bridges. Cable layout in skew and curved bridges. Methods of bridge construction. Aesthetic considerations in bridge design.
637
Behaviour and Design of Prestressed Concrete Members
Flexural analysis and design of prestressed and partially prestressed concrete members based on stresses, deflections and strength. Design of members subjected to shear, torsion, compression or tension. Fire resistance. Composite members. Bond and anchorage zones. Prestressing losses and time-dependent deformations. Discussion of current design standards.
639
Structural Dynamics
Numerical analysis of simple systems; rigorous analysis of one-degree systems; lumped mass multi-degree systems and structures with distributed mass and load; approximate analysis and design methods; earthquakes, blast-resistant design, beams subjected to moving loads; calculation of results by analog and digital computer.
641
Seismic Analysis and Design
Introduction to seismology, ground movements, typical accelograms. Response spectra for linear and non-linear responses, role of damping and inelastic behaviour. Equivalent lateral load for design, code requirements. Structural design concepts to mitigate seismic effects. Design of steel structures for earthquake motions. Design of concrete frames and walls for earthquake motions.
643
Structural Masonry Design
Component materials and their properties, masonry properties, quality control, plain and reinforced masonry, beams, walls, slender walls, columns, load-moment interaction curves, concentrated load bearing, shear load distribution, shear walls, code provisions, building envelope, detailing, differential movement, geometric walls, prestressed masonry, arches.
645
Risk Analysis
The objective of this course in engineering risk analysis and risk assessment is to familiarize students with the principles and techniques of quantitative risk analysis. Key focus points are the treatment of uncertainties, the attitude of conservatism, risk perception, the careful use of quantitative risk measures, and a discussion of the dangers tasks facing risk-based decision makers. Includes: Hazards, risk, risk analysis, risk assessment; risk measures; probability, uncertainty modelling, stochastic variables; using and misusing data, reliability, tails; risk assessment frameworks, models in health and environmental risk analysis, models in engineering risk analysis; risk perception, risk comparison; and practical case studies.
647
Structural Reliability Analysis
Concepts of risk and reliability, uncertainties, and engineering decision making. Techniques for reliability-based assessment of structural components and systems. Time-dependent structural reliability analysis including load, load effect, and resistance modelling. Code calibration using structural reliability. Reliability assessment of existing structures. Applications focus on design and optimization of uncertain systems such as structures, soils, and infrastructure systems.
653
Theory and Applications of the Finite Element Method
Conceptual framework of the finite element method with emphasis on applications to structural analysis: shape functions, continuity at nodes, numerical integration, matrix assembly. Scope of the method, use of basic equations of elasticity, displacement (stiffness) method of analysis. Sources of error and poor performance; mesh sensitivity; element types, their selection and behaviour. Applications in structural analysis, heat conduction and other non-structural problems; use of available finite element programs.
655
Numerical Methods for Modelling Geomaterials
Methods of theoretical analysis for solving partial differential equations associated with Geotechnical and Structural Engineering. Variational Principles, Principle of Virtual Work and Galerkin Method. Theory of finite element and focus on its computer implementation for analysis of engineering problems. Typical applications include two- and three-dimensional stress analysis, seepage flow, and coupled fluid flow-solid deformation problems. Advanced topics: numerical strategies for solving material and geometric non-linearities (plasticity and large deformations), poro-elasticity and plasticity, strain localization, and presentation of other numerical techniques such as finite difference, boundary element, discrete element methods.
657
Airport Planning and Engineering
Planning of airport systems; planning and design of the airfield; airside capacity and delay; air traffic control; planning and design of the passenger terminal; analysis of airport operations.
659
Sustainable Infrastructure

665
Fundamentals of Soil Behaviour
Principle of effective stress in saturated soil, unsaturated soil and clay. Engineering properties of soils. Shear strength and deformation characteristics of soils in static, cyclic, drained and/or undrained loading. Laboratory testing of soils. One-dimensional consolidation, poro-elastic deformation, swelling mechanism, time-dependent deformation and soil contamination in soils.
667
Applied Rock Engineering
Engineering properties of intact rock and rock mass. Rock classification. Slope and underground excavation; groundwater flow in fractured rock; poro-elastic deformation analysis; hydraulic fracturing.
669
Permafrost Engineering
Development, characteristics and significance of permafrost, including the thermal and hydrological processes and resulting periglacial geomorphology and geotechnical implications. Contemporary topics in science and engineering of seasonally and perennially frozen ground.
671
Advanced Foundation Engineering

673
Constitutive Laws for Geomaterials
Definition of a continuous medium. Description of deformable continuous media; concepts of stress, strain and their invariants. Constitutive equations geomaterials as a generic for soil, rock and concrete materials in civil engineering. Review of elasticity theory. Introduction to yielding, plastic flow and failure phenomena in geomaterials. Limit analysis with applications to both geotechnical and structural engineering. Stress-strain behaviour for both cohesive and granular materials. Constitutive models based on critical state theory will be presented. Other topics such as strain localization and fracture phenomena may be included as appropriate.
689
Advanced Project Management Practices and Principles
Advanced practices, tools and concepts in managing complex volatile or large projects. SMART project management based on best practices in diverse industries forms the basis of this course.
691
Fundamentals of Project Management
Application of management principles to the project environment; planning, control, scope, time and cost processes; project organization and human resource issues. Students review aspects of a current major capital project and submit and defend a project report.
693
Project Engineering Management
Role of the engineering manager in the project management team. The engineering firm, its organization and function; project development, engineering project control; design control; scope and estimate control; engineering interfaces with procurement and construction; engineering responsibility in project commissioning start-up and operations.
695
Project Construction Management
Role of the construction manager in the project management team; project options for the management of construction; managing the contractor's business; labour relations; claims; contractor(s) responsibility in project commissioning start-up and operations.
697
Project Planning and Control
Strategic and tactical planning; planning for scope, quality, time and cost; selection and implementation of project management information system; economic and risk analysis; planning for construction labour relations.
699
Law for Project Managers
Legal issues related to the effective management of projects. Introduction to the legal system and processes; environmental law; intellectual property non-disclosure; professional liability; contract law; strategic alliances; employment law; the builder's lien act. Cases are reviewed and students are expected to complete a number of assignments requiring research into case law.
707
Theory of Transport Demand Modelling
Modelling for transport planning; data in transport modelling; trip generation modelling; trip distribution modelling; modal split modelling; direct demand models; traffic assignment; equilibrium in transport modelling; discrete-choice models; specification and estimation of logit models; aggregation issues; simplified transport demand models; model updating and transferability.
709
Practice of Transport Demand Modelling
Sample enumeration modelling; practical aspects of logit model estimation and calibration; disaggregate choice behaviour data; practical four-step transport demand modelling using conventional software packages; application of computer-based network assignment models.
711
Advanced Analysis and Modelling of Public Transit Systems
Role of public transport in a city; concepts of public and private benefits; economies of scale; main modes of urban public transport systems: rail, bus, van and other vehicles; advanced mathematical modelling of mode of operation, route alignment, access, station and stop location, transfer protocols, time table, vehicle and fleet size, reliability; concepts of utility and value of time; detailed functional design and optimization of a bus route, rail line; bus, rail and metro networks.
715
Transport Economics
Economic characteristics of transport; movement and location; transport demand; direct costs of transport; the value of travel time; external costs of transport; shadow prices; pricing of transport services; containment of external costs of transport; private and public sector investment analysis in transport; transport and economic development; transport policy.
717
Dynamic Traffic Flow and Network Modelling
Fundamental traffic flow characteristics; moving bottlenecks and standing queues; macroscopic traffic flow models, shockwave theory and queuing theory; Traffic instabilities such as capacity drop, wide moving jams and hysteresis loops; Higher order traffic models; Microscopic models (i.e. car-following models); Static assignment including the concepts of user equilibrium and system optimum, shortest path and Braece paradox; Formulation of traffic assignment as a mathematic programming and solution algorithm; Basic concepts of dynamic traffic assignment including dynamic network loading and route choice; advanced traffic management with particular emphasis on advanced traffic management and control and discussion of microscopic simulation models.
741
Biological Processes for Wastewater Treatment
Specialized biological wastewater treatment processes for removal of impurities not effectively removed by conventional secondary wastewater treatment systems, such as nutrients (e.g. nitrogen and phosphorus), residual organics, residual solids, bacteria and viruses.  Wetlands.  Activated sludge modelling. Biological nutrient removal. Sludge management. Disinfection.
745
Hazardous Waste and Contaminated Sites Management
Integrated waste management. Functional and fundamental properties of hazardous waste. Toxicological properties of contaminants. Contaminant release mechanisms. Fate and transport of contaminants in the environment. Contaminated site assessment principles. Quantitative human health risk assessment (QHHRA) as applied to contaminated sites. Hazard identification, exposure pathway analysis, risk characterization. Risk management and site remediation. Methods of hazardous waste treatment and contaminated site remediation. Secure land disposal of hazardous waste and contaminated soils and sludges.
747
Contaminated Soil Remediation
Overview of soil remediation engineering. Contaminant partitioning in air, water and gas phases. Phases of site assessments, Physical and chemical treatment processes, soil vapour extraction, air sparging, soil washing, soil flushing, thermal desorption and incineration, solidification and stabilization, vitrification, biological treatment processes, bioremediation kinetics, ex situ and in situ techniques. Liquid phase bioremediation as it pertains to soil remediation.
749
Environmental Aspects of Waste Disposal Systems
Soil-chemical interactions and implications in waste disposal system design; landfill design principles; leachate production, leachate migration in the unsaturated/saturated zones; analytical and numerical solution of flow and transport equations; applications and case studies of groundwater contamination; design and construction of barrier systems; bioreactor landfills; landfill closure issues; greenhouse gas control systems.
751
Snow Avalanche Hazard Mitigation
Avalanche motion and protection including avalanche terrain, frictional flow, impact pressures, avalanche risk for fixed structures, elements of structural defence, and run-out estimation based on statistical models, dynamic models, air photo interpretation, field studies of vegetation and historical records.
753
Snow Avalanche Formation and Release
Snowpack properties and processes including meteorological and ground effects on the snowpack, energy balance at the snow surface, snowpack stratigraphy, metamorphism of snow grains, bonding, as well as spatial and temporal variability of the snowpack. Avalanche initiation including deformation and failure of weak layers, models of slab failure and fracture propagation. Concepts of snow stability, avalanche forecasting and avalanche risk for recreationists.
Communication and Culture
6
201
Culture Foundations
A critical and inter-disciplinary examination, via classic texts, of the Greco-Roman and Judeo-Christian Heritage of Western Civilization (e.g., Homer, Sophocles, Plato, Augustine). Focus on major ideas, principles and their implications within the time frame of the Ancient and Medieval periods (i.e., 3000 B.C.E.–400 C.E.) and in comparison with non-Western traditions.
203
Roads to Modernity
A critical and inter-disciplinary examination, via classic texts (e.g., Chaucer, Machiavelli, Montaigne, Dante), of how the Greco-Roman and Judeo-Christian traditions were transformed into the Modern West. Focus on the major ideas, principles and their implications within the timeframe from the sixth to the sixteenth century and in comparison to non-Western traditions.
305
Modernity
A critical and inter-disciplinary examination, via classic texts (e.g., Bacon, Hobbes, Locke, Marx, Woolf, Freud, Sartre), of the meaning of Modernity in Western and non-Western contexts. Focus on the major ideas, principles and their implications from the seventeenth to the twentieth century.
307
Contours of Contemporary Culture
A critical and inter-disciplinary examination, via classic texts (e.g., Bettelheim, Wiesel, Arendt, Ellul, Marcuse, DeBeauvoir, hooks, Foucault, Camus, and Maslow), of how modernity has been transformed within the framework of an evolving global culture. Focus on the major ideas, principles and their implications within the time frame of the twentieth century to the present.
507
Collaborative Learning and Peer Mentoring
Study of  learning theories and learning processes with practical experience through helping learners in a University of Calgary undergraduate course under the supervision of that course's instructor. Activities may include facilitating discussion in classrooms or online, discussing topics for term papers, organizing and assisting study groups, or coaching peers in their oral presentation or writing skills.
509
Research in Peer Mentoring and Higher Learning
Students continue to support peers in their learning processes using a facilitative, collaborative approach. As part of their mentoring hours, students will assist new peer mentors to grow into their roles. Students will conduct a textual and field research project related to their peer mentoring roles.
Communication and Media Studies
45
201
Introduction to Communication and Media Studies
A general mapping of the field, with an emphasis on its breadth in the areas of media studies, communication of science and technology and rhetorical communication. General examination of how Communications Studies emerged during the twentieth century and how the field relates to issues of social and cultural change.
203
New Media
An introduction to the social, political and cultural aspects of new media. Examines the social factors that influence the use of new media, as well as the effects of new media on different spheres of social life. Topics may include the historical development of new media; participatory cultures; copyright and Internet law; creative industries; and surveillance and governance in new media.
313
Communication Research Methods
A critical introduction to communication research methods. Students will explore, practice and critique selected quantitative and qualitative research methods and perspectives on the processes of knowledge production.
363
Professional and Technical Communication
An introduction to professional and technical communication in diverse media. Examines the rhetorical dimensions of workplace settings as well as the process of planning, composing and delivering professional and technical communication for various audiences.
367
Visual Communication and Culture
Critical study of images in society. Topics may include formal image analysis; theories of the image; the politics and ethics of visual representation; portraiture and identity; advertising images; spectacle and modern media; war and propaganda imagery; circulation and the networked image; iconoclasm and censorship.
369
Rhetorical Communication
An introduction to the basic principles of rhetorical theory, criticism and practice. Examines rhetorical perspectives on elements of communication such as argumentation, persuasion, audience, situation, genre and ethics. Students will apply rhetorical theory to the criticism of samples of public communication and will practice their rhetorical skills through in-class activities and assigned writing and oral presentations.
371
Critical Media Studies
Emphasizes major critical approaches and theoretical foundations of media studies research. Explores the contexts in which these theories arose, identifies their major strengths and weaknesses and analyzes how critical theory engages the social world. Areas covered include the Frankfurt School, structuralism and semiotics, cultural studies, post-structuralism and feminist media studies.
381
Communications History
A general survey of how various communication systems and practices developed through history and of the social contexts within which they emerged, transformed and adapted through time. Examines major technological developments in the history of human communication and uses theory to understand their origins and impacts on social organization and everyday life.
383
Introduction to Public Relations
Public relations theory and practice, with a particular emphasis on Canadian examples. Focus on links between public relations and new media, ethical standards of practice, and critical perspectives on public relations as well as on the development of practical skills.
393
Critical Perspectives on Health and Science
Examines the construction and communication of health and science as socio-cultural phenomena and interrogates the ways in which health and science issues are communicated, defined, represented and framed, particularly within contemporary media.
401
Special Topics in Communication and Media Studies
Critical study of contemporary topics or issues related to communications media, technology, culture, or discourse. Past topics have included gaming, the music industry, feminism, video activism, propaganda, fan cultures, and women in sport.
413
Advanced Research Methods
An in-depth study of selected methods for social and cultural research. Students will design and carry out empirical research applying these methods.
435
Communication and Canadian Society
Explores aspects of Canadian communication, including historical development, theoretical approaches, challenges posed by advances in technology, and policy questions such as media ownership, Canadian content requirements and the relationship between media and democracy.
463
Rhetorical Communication in Online Environments

469
Rhetorical History and Criticism
A study of rhetorical thought and action from selected periods, cultures and authors from the classical period to the modern age, with an emphasis on the interaction between rhetoric and philosophical, social and political change. Theories will be applied to the criticism of historical and contemporary public communication.
473
Popular Culture
Introduces critical tools for deconstructing and evaluating the social significance of popular cultural texts, including music, television, film, advertising, memes and viral content. Particular focus on audience reception as a key method for understanding fan practices and subcultures
475
Media and Cultural Industries
Considers the role and nature of media and cultural industries, offering students understanding of their role in the production and circulation of popular culture and information. Industries typically examined are television, radio, newspapers and other print media, film, sound recording, book publishing and advertising.
477
Food Culture and Communication
A theoretical and experiential introduction to food cultures as processes and products of communication. Examines how food is constructed and represented through text, film, television, art and tourism. Political and economic constructions of food culture, security and sustainability will also be explored.
479
Feminist Media Studies
Introduces critical perspectives and practices of feminist media studies and interrogates how gendered, racialized and sexualized subjectivities are produced, circulated and consumed through media cultures and texts. A key focus will be relationships between power, media and identity.
481
Advanced Studies in New Media and Society
Examines the nature, origins and social implications of new media with a focus on the Internet. Evolving forms of interpersonal, group and public communication based on the Internet will be assessed in terms of the role they play in identity formation, cultural integration, learning, political participation, commerce and work.
485
Environmental Media and Communication
Examines the mutual entanglements of media, communication and the environment, with a particular focus on media representations of the environment and environmental risks. May also examine environmental issues related to communications technologies and global communications infrastructures.
491
Introduction to Acoustic Communications and Acoustic Ecology
Concepts, techniques and applications of the fields of Acoustic Communications (the ways in which speech and music convey meaning) and Acoustic Ecology (the effects of sound in natural and human environments). These interdisciplinary areas weave together communication theory, cognitive psychology, sociology, musicology, physical sciences, health sciences and aesthetics.
501
Research in Selected Topics
Supervised individual study of a special topic.
502
Political Economy of Communication
Examines power relations between public, government and commercial forces in communication. Looks at how media dynamics have shifted historically and how current policies, structures and institutions impact our daily media interactions.
503
Advanced Special Topics in Communication and Media Studies
Advanced study of contemporary topics or issues related to communications media, technology, culture or discourse.
507
Experiential Learning in Communications and Media
Supervised individual study through guided experiential learning. Opportunity provided to combine interests in communications research and theory with experiential learning opportunities in an organization or university unit. Involves a communication-related placement or project that engages students in critical reflection on community experience in the context of their formal education.
581
Senior Project in BCMS/BFS
An advanced research and experiential project incorporating academic research and media production. The project will be produced in a medium appropriate to the student's specialization: print, radio, television, video, film or digital media.
591
Senior Seminar in Communication and Media
Explores the variety of ways in which communication builds social and cultural values with reference to a special topic. Completion of a major project that will integrate understanding of communication theory, history and methodology.
595
Honours Seminar
Individual research and seminar activities (e.g., critiques, presentations, and peer reviews of drafts) to produce a proposal and a paper to be used as the basis for the Honours Thesis.
597
Honours Thesis

601
Interdisciplinary Approaches to Communication and Media Studies
An overview of theories, problematics and approaches in communication and media.
603
Critical Media Studies
Theories and perspectives in the study of media production, industries, genres, and reception.
613
Communication and Cultural Theory

615
Research Methods

617
Representation and Identity
An investigation of various issues related to representation and identity, including but not limited to race, ethnicity, gender and sexuality.
619
Communications and Cultural Industries

623
Social Contexts of Science and Technology
Theoretical perspectives for understanding central debates in the study of science and technology in their social, political, cultural, and communication contexts.
631
Social and  Media Activism
A critical overview of how digital media are being taken up by social justice movements and the implications of these new media practices in relation to politics and activism.
641
International Communication
An examination of cultural/communication issues and practices in international contexts. Examines the role of media systems in processes of culture, development, and identity formation.
643
Methods in Film Studies
An examination of key approaches to studying film, including its aesthetic, historical, and theoretical dimensions.
645
Media and Democracy
An examination of the role played by media in democratic systems past and present. Draws from classic and contemporary democratic theory to explore the changing positions of traditional and new media, focusing on the interrelationships of media, political institutions and citizenship.
647
Communication and Health
Critically exploring the concept of health through the lens of communication, examines cultural and media representations of health, along with questions of health and identity, health promotion and advocacy, health risk and regulation, and social movements.
711
Directed Studies
A research project under the direction of a faculty member.
713
PhD Theory Seminar
A seminar that enables PhD students to focus their research interests and to explore theories relevant to their areas of specialization.
717
Selected Topics in Communication, Media and Film
A variety of communication, media and film topics based on faculty expertise.
Community Health Sciences
47
600
Introduction to Community Health Sciences
An introduction to the Department as well as a general orientation to the education and research programs in Community Health.
602
Practicum in Public Health and Preventative Medicine
Clinical or field-based practicum for the Master of Community Medicine Program of the Community Health Sciences graduate program.
603
Practicum in Health Care Epidemiology
Clinical or field-based practicum for the Health Care Epidemiology specialization of the Community Health Sciences graduate program.
604
Practicum in Community Health Sciences
Clinical or field-based practicum for students in any specialization of the Community Health Sciences graduate program.
605
Introduction to Biostastical Methods
Analysis and design of research related to biological sciences. Emphasis is placed upon formulating good research questions, evaluating the appropriateness of different statistical methods for analyzing results, and performing and interpreting such statistical analyses. Statistical analyses will be carried out using modern statistical software.
610
Biostatistics I: Essentials of Biostatistics
Introduces the fundamental concepts of summarizing data and statistical inference, including graphical displays, hypothesis testing, p-values, and confidence intervals. Specific topics include comparisons of means and proportions, non-parametric tests, correlation and regression, confounding, sample size determination, and power calculations. Additional topics include a brief introduction to analysis of variance and covariance, logistic regression, and analysis of time-to-event data. Students gain hands-on experience analyzing data using STATA statistical software. Although this course uses STATA exclusively, much of the technical knowledge and some of the computing techniques are applicable to any statistical package.
611
Biostatistics II: Models for Health Outcomes
Extends the fundamental concepts to modelling health outcomes using modern regression analysis techniques. Logistic and linear regressions, and their extensions, are covered in detail. The rationale, formulation, and statistical assumptions underlying each regression technique are discussed. Methods for selecting and assessing models are included. Additional topics include a brief introduction to models used in the analysis of repeated measures, longitudinal studies, and time-to-event data. STATA statistical software is used to analyze data. Required course for Biostatistics and Epidemiology specializations.
612
Biostatistics III: Models for Repeated Measures Studies and Time-to-Events Studies
Discusses techniques for analyzing data collected at more than one point in time (repeated measures) and time-to-event (survival) data. Topics include generalized linear models (GLM), generalized additive models (GAM), Poisson regression, generalized estimating equations (GEE), and proportional hazards regression with time-varying covariates. STATA statistical software is used to analyze data.
626
Meta-Analysis/Systematic Review in Medical Education
To become familiar with the theory, research, and application of meta-analysis/systematic review as it applies to the compilation of studies in education and health care with a focus on the discipline of medicine education. In particular, an emphasis will be placed on the principles of using statistical methods and techniques related to synthesizing studies in the measurement of a pre-determined and appropriate topic of interest to the participant.
627
Medical Education Assessment and Measurement
Approaches to assessment and measurement within the context of competency-based medical education.
628
Teaching, Learning, and Curriculum Design
Overview of context in which medicine is taught and learned, the theory related to learning and change, the key elements of curriculum design and evaluation, and examine traditional and innovative methods used to enhance student and practitioner knowledge, skills and attitudes.
629
Foundations of Practice and Science in Medical Education
Foundational academic concepts in the science of medical education including an overview of the philosophy of science, history of medical education and medical education scholarship along with fundamental concepts in medical education scholarship such as ethics and professionalism, critical appraisal and academic leadership.
630
Designing Medical Education Research
Why and how of research in medical education including core components of research, ethical issues, project management, the research proposal, reviewing the literature, data collection and analysis, reports and dissemination.
631
Implementation of Medical Education Research
Technical aspects of conducting a study including writing questions, selecting methods that are aligned with the research questions and approaches to analyzing quantitative and qualitative data.
640
Fundamentals of Epidemiology
Principles and methods of descriptive and analytic epidemiology. Emphasizes the underlying concepts and approaches of epidemiological research and critical appraisal of epidemiologic studies including: observational study designs and their vulnerabilities to bias, measures of frequency and association, basic methods for addressing sampling variability, confounding, and effect modification. Concepts related to causal judgment in epidemiology are also introduced.
641
Introduction to Clinical Trials
An introduction to methodological issues in the design and conduct of randomized controlled trials. Topics include ethics, blinding, randomization, sample size determination, sequential designs, data monitoring, and the logistical and organizational aspects of single centre and multi-centre trials.
642
Psychiatric Epidemiology
An overview of the context, principles and methods of psychiatric epidemiology. Basic concepts of bias and random error will be applied specifically to problems encountered in conducting psychiatric epidemiological studies. An additional objective is for students to gain a basic understanding of psychiatric terminology and nosology, including a basic understanding of the clinical features of major diagnostic categories.
643
Research in Health Care Epidemiology and Infection Control
Emphasizes the research aspects of health care epidemiology and the application of basic epidemiologic and biostatistical techniques in the health care environment. The course uses an interdisciplinary approach and fosters the integration of knowledge and skills from the bench to the bedside and back.
644
Surveillance I: Data Handling for Infection Control
Focuses on the skills needed for data handling related to Infection Control in various settings. The primary aims are: (1) to develop the skills to properly manage data using various tools and technology; (2) to use basic statistical tools to analyze data used in Infection control; (3) to properly interpret and draw appropriate conclusions from data used in infection control.
645
Surveillance II: Principles of Surveillance
Focuses on the practice of surveillance for Infection Prevention and Control in various settings. The primary aims are: (1) to be able to base surveillance on an appropriate rationale; (2) to understand and use various methods of surveillance; (3) to make recommendations and follow up on the results of surveillance; (4) to be able to evaluate a surveillance program and incorporate into quality improvement.
646
Introduction to Public Health Surveillance
Surveillance is a public health function. Topics included in this online course include definition and overview of public health surveillance, indicators, frameworks and principles for the planning and evaluation of surveillance systems; analysis and interpretation of surveillance data; communication of public health information; and legal and ethical issues relevant to surveillance systems.
647
Clinical Epidemiology
Designed for students who have some familiarity and experience in epidemiology, biostatistics and who have a background in clinical health care or related field. It focuses on the application of epidemiologic methods to clinical health issues.
648
Online Basic Infection Control
Focuses on providing novice Infection Control Professionals (ICPs) with the basic knowledge, tools and strategies needed to do Infection control in a board range of health care environments from health care institutions to the community. The purpose of this entry to practice course is (1) to identify and describe the scope of infection prevention and control problems and issues for novice ICPs and (2) to examine and integrate their current expertise with the basic knowledge, tools and strategies needed to examine problems and develop practical solutions in Infection Control.
649
Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases
Focuses on the principles of epidemiology that are of particular relevance to infectious diseases. The course emphasizes the research aspects of infectious diseases epidemiology and how the basic techniques of epidemiology and biostatistics are applied in the communicable diseases.
660
Foundations of Health Services Research
An introduction to the fundamental concepts of health services research including topics related to health systems and methods in health services research, as well as evaluation of health systems performance, with emphasis on knowledge translation and health policy creation and analysis.
661
Health Economics I
Application of basic concepts from economics to examination of health and health care policy issues, such as why we have the kind of health-care system we have, various aspects of health care reform, promotion of health, and evaluation of interventions.
662
Economic Evaluation
Designed for students interested in being able to critically interpret economic evaluation studies of health or health care interventions and beyond. The aim of the course is to introduce students to the concepts and methods of economic evaluation, provide an introduction to how it may serve as a useful tool in health and health care decision-making, and to enable students to critically appraise the economic evaluation literature.
663
Decision Analysis in Health Economic
Students will be introduced to the concepts of decision analysis and how it may serve as a useful tool in health care economics evaluation. Through attention to a clinical question or health care policy issue, students will develop the skills necessary to perform an economic evaluation to address it.
664
Administrative Data Analysis Methodology
Administrative data have been used widely for decision making and research. Analysis of the data requires knowledge of the data features and unique analytical skills since the data are not collected for research purposes. This course is designed to provide these skills. Through analyzing available administrative data, students will write manuscripts suitable for publications at peer-reviewed journals.
665
Leadership in Health Care Organizations
A foundation for developing management and leadership skills in health care organizations. The curriculum includes: fundamentals of leadership; formal and informal components of organizations; strategic, operational, financial and project planning; managing change and conflict; human resources; and evaluating organizational performance. A variety of learning opportunities are incorporated including: reading materials, student seminars, self-assessment tools, case studies, team assignments, guest speakers and class discussion.
666
Health Policy
An advanced level course focused on developing and deepening participants' understanding of critical policy issues affecting health and health services. The course will primarily review health policy in the context of Canadian populations and systems. However, a more global comparative frame of reference will be used to test, challenge and contrast both the historical and current underpinnings of health policy in Canadian jurisdictions.
667
Introduction to the Legal and Ethical Framework of Health Care in Canada
An introduction to two integrated aspects of health care in Canada: the legal dimensions and the ethical dimensions. No formal background or training in law or ethics is presupposed. Successful students will gain grounding in the ethico-legal complexity of health care and health research in Canada.
680
Foundations of Population/Public Health
Students will learn, discuss, and interrogate foundational content in population health and public health. Foundational content includes history, structure, functions, concepts, theories, and debates. The course is structured with the first half focusing on public health and the second half focusing on population health.
681
Health Research Methods
Introduction to health research, including research design, measurement, data collection, proposal and grant writing.
683
Introduction to Qualitative Health Research for the Health Sciences
A focus on understanding and appraising published examples of qualitative research on health topics as well as analyzing qualitative findings in health research. The importance of both methods and theories for ensuring rigor will be emphasized. Examples of relevance to people’s experiences of health, illness and health care as well as the social and structural determinants of health will be considered.
687
Environmental Health
Examination of the interaction between natural and man-made environments in human health/illness.
689
Global Health and Development
An examination of health, the determinants of health, and approaches to health policy and programming in the context of less developed country populations. The course provides an overview of the history and evolution of primary health care and the role of health in development and examines current trends and issues related to global development. Cross-cutting themes include: international perspectives and trends in health sector reform, globalization, policy programming and financing, public participation in decision making, governance, health human resources, gender, human rights, partnerships and information-education-communication among others.
700
Community Health Directed Study
Independent study in special topics at an advanced level in Community Health Sciences.
710
Advanced Topics in Biostatistics
Advanced topics and methods used in biostatistics.
720
Pro Doctoral Seminar
Pertinent topics discussed to prepare students for thesis preparation.
730
Doctoral Medical Education Research Seminar
An exploration of medical education research as an emerging field with multiple overlapping discourses, methods, philosophies, and ideologies.
740
Advanced Epidemiology
An expansion on the understanding of causality and threats to validity in epidemiologic research. The focus will be on the assessment and control of bias, including selection, information and confounding. The concept of effect modification (interaction) will be appraised. Stratified analysis will be considered as a tool for the assessment and control of confounding and effect modification and will be applied to a variety of study designs including case-control, and cohort studies.
741
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis
An exposure to all steps involved in the conduct of a systematic review and meta-analysis.
742
Advanced Topics in Epidemiology
Advanced topics and methods used in Epidemiology.
760
Advanced Topics in Health Services Research
Advanced topics and methods used in health services research.
761
Advanced Methods in Health Research
Advanced health research designs and measurement techniques.
780
Advanced Topics in Population/Public Health
Advanced topics and methods used in population/public health.
Community Rehabilitation
43
205
Introduction to Disability Studies
The social, political, economic, ethics/bioethical, technological and advocacy issues impacting persons with disabilities and their families. Supports professional development tutorials in community practicum.
207
An Introduction to Community Rehabilitation Practice and Professional Conduct
Practical application of the basic principles of assessment, planning and intervention with individuals/groups. Supports professional development tutorials in community practica.
209
Disability in Theory and Everyday Life
An overview of theories employed in community rehabilitation and disability studies.
321
Communication Skills in Rehabilitation
A skills-based introduction to understanding and developing basic communication skills that facilitate helpful dialogue in interpersonal, counselling, guidance and community rehabilitation related contexts.
435
Social Research in Disability, Health and Rehabilitation Disablement
An overview of research methods in community rehabilitation and disability studies. An introduction to the major design, analyses and knowledge transfer strategies in the field.
471
Community Rehabilitation Practice for Families and Their Children
Families with children with disabilities in the context of the family relationships, support networks, schools and communities.
473
Social Justice and the Labour Force
Exploring the role of work for youth and adult with disabilities.
475
Community Rehabilitation Practice and the Aging Process
Theoretical and practical issues as they relate to rehabilitation and community services for seniors with disabilities.
485
An Introduction to Community Rehabilitation Practice and Professional Conduct

487
Practicum in Rehabilitation Practice
Practical application of the basic principles of assessment, planning and intervention with individuals/groups. Supports professional development tutorials in community practicum.
536
Adapting Curriculum in Schools K-12
A variety of practical strategies for developing meaningful curriculum modifications and instructional methods for students with disabilities. The strategies are premised on using collaborative team approaches to planning and implementing instructional programs for students. Involving families as a meaningful part of the learning team will also be emphasized.
537
Inclusion and Challenging Behaviours
An examination and expansion of belief systems surrounding challenging behaviour. Participants will be offered opportunities to learn about successful strategies for supporting difficult students within a classroom as well as other settings.
538
Ethics of Inclusion
Ethics of caring and inclusion and implications for educational reform. Topics include the ethics of inclusive teaching practices in regular classrooms, educational systems change and leadership.
541
International Disability Research and Policy
Disability research and policy including human rights policy and law whereby the student learns to understand local, national and global perspectives.
543
Integrating the Arts
Principles, theories and applications of creative art techniques with varied populations. Of particular interest to rehabilitation practitioners working with persons who present behavioural challenges.
547
Health Research, Emerging Technologies and Marginalized Groups
Provides an in-depth global outlook on new, envisioned and emerging sciences and technologies and their global impact on (a) disabled people and disability studies; (b) the concept and field of rehabilitation and identity of rehabilitation professionals; (c) the concept of health professionals. Also provides an understanding of how disability studies scholars and rehabilitation and health policy, systems and care delivery scholars and professionals can enrich the new, envisioned and emerging science and technology and governance of science and technology discourse.
549
Understanding Children with Autism
Introduces students to Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). Discussions of the biological bases for the disorders as well as historical perspectives will be covered. Current research will be investigated from a variety of perspectives and philosophies. This course will provide students with in-depth knowledge of techniques used to treat children with autism, both empirically validated and those currently in vogue. An overview of characteristics, assessment strategies, issues, and approaches related to children with autism will be provided.
553
Health Foundations: Disability Across the Lifespan
Explores the concepts of community rehabilitation in the context of anatomy and physiology of disabling conditions and human development across the lifespan. Self-directed learning is based on case studies, exploring current literature, and online interactive group work and forum discussions.
559
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and Community Rehabilitation
A disability studies approach to Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder and how this approach can facilitate an understanding of individuals with FASD in view of the principles of community inclusion and social justice as these apply to family support, schooling, intervention, prevention and life-long supports.
569
Recovery Models: Mental Health and Disability
Clinical and interprofessional skills for those working in recovery and consumer driven programs in Community Mental Health and Disability.
573
Disability and the Law
Foundations of Canadian legal principles and practices as they affect community rehabilitation.
583
Community Development in Community Rehabilitation
A study of management, practice and leadership issues for professionals working in community development and interdisciplinary teams, as well as in private, non-profit and public community-based organizations and businesses. Partnerships and community action are examined as components of rehabilitation practice.
591
Advanced Study Topics in Community Rehabilitation
Advanced study topics in community rehabilitation.
594
Practicum I
Senior level program and management skills in partner agencies, associations and systems. Specifics to be negotiated with the student. Content on professional ethics will also be covered.
595
Practicum II
Senior level program and management skills in partner agencies, associations and systems. Specifics to be negotiated with the student. Content on professional ethics will also be covered.
597
Practicum I in Community Rehabilitation for Distance Learners
Students will complete a project in the area of program or service development (e.g. needs analysis, developing funding proposals, program evaluation). In the seminars, students will be supported in the completion of agency-based program development. Content on professional ethics will also be covered.
598
Practicum II in Community Rehabilitation for Distance Learners
Students will complete a project in the area of program or service development (e.g. needs analysis, developing funding proposals, program evaluation). In the seminars, students will be supported in the completion of agency-based program development. Content on professional ethics will also be covered.
624
Specialization Theory and Practice: A Collaborative Inquiry Capstone
Students refine a topic of inquiry, prepare background working papers, invite reactions from stakeholders/experts and report on their experience to stakeholder audience, fellow students and faculty. This is not a research course but an opportunity for students to own their knowledge and find ways to share their experience and education with others in a collaborative manner.
630
Foundations and Futures of Disability and Community Studies
History, current issues, and futures of intervention, activism, and academic study related to disability. This will include the systems and changing roles of those traditionally served, professionals, the teams they generate and society.
631
Politics of Inclusion and Exclusion of Disability and Community Studies
Current topics relevant to inclusion and exclusion will be reviewed. An examination of research in disability provides an opportunity for the student to learn, understand, and compare legislation, policy, and ethical frameworks that inform action. Frameworks of choice, respect, consultation, collaboration, and co-operation will be examined.
632
Leadership and Innovation
The changing personal, organizational, and societal, leadership role and its importance for innovation in the field of disability and community studies.
633
Social Construction: Health Capacity and Disability
A constructivist exploration of language, political structures, and sense of self to deepen the understanding of health capacity and disability.
634
Appraisal of Social and Health Quantitative Research Methods
Provides students with experience in critically appraising a range of quantitative research methods and familiarize them with a variety of bio-statistical approaches. A variety of frameworks will be used to critically appraise literature from students’ chosen field of study and examine and discuss the implications for evidence-based practice.
641
Special Topics in International Disability Research and Policy
Selected topics in disability research and policy provide an opportunity for the student to learn, understand, and compare the policies in two or more countries.
650
Adapting Curriculum and Instruction from K-12
A variety of practical strategies for developing meaningful curriculum and instructional methods for students with severe disabilities. The strategies are premised on using the content of typical community collaborative team approaches to planning and implementing programs for students. Involving parents as part of the Learning Team will be emphasized.
651
Challenging Behaviours in the Classroom: Inclusive Education
Examines and builds upon the participant's belief systems about challenging behaviour. Participants will be offered opportunities to learn about successful strategies for supporting difficult students within a classroom setting.
652
Collaboration, Ethics, Management: Inclusive Education
Each year a topic is negotiated with the education sector in partnership with provincial advocacy organizations.
653
Advanced Seminar: Assessment and Intervention for Families with Children with Special Needs
Exploration of cognitive, social/emotional, motor, language/communication development and assessment of children with disabilities in the context of their families and communities.
654
Health Research, Emerging Technologies and Marginalized Groups
Provides an in depth view of the impact of new emerging technologies and the governance of science and technology and health research on social policy, disability studies, disability research and the lives of disabled people and other marginalized groups.
655
Bioethics and People with Disabilities
Provides an in depth view of the impact of bioethics on social policy, disability studies, disability research and the lives of disabled people.
656
Career Development and Disabilities
Exploration of career development issues such as occupational change, and integration back into the workforce because of disability experienced in adult life.
676
Consultation in Human Services and Systems
Qualitative and quantitative evaluation research informs the design and implementation of a collaborative evaluation of a rehabilitation program, policy or system.
730
Doctoral Pro-Seminar in Disability, Community and Rehabilitation
This advanced professional seminar focuses on a critical examination of theoretical, methodological, and professional issues relevant to research in the domains of community rehabilitation and disability studies. The course is intended for PhD students preparing their dissertation research proposals as a final preparation for their Candidacy Exam.
Comparative Literature
1
399
Studies in Comparative Literature

Computational Media Design
2
601
Special Topics in Computational Media Design
A study of topics related to computational media design.
603
Research Project in Computational Media Design
An independent research project in computational media design under the guidance of a faculty member.
Computer Engineering
10
335
Programming Fundamentals for Electrical Engineers
Key features of the C programming language. Pointers, memory models and memory management. Manipulation of text files and binary files. Introduction to recursion. Introduction to object-based programming using a modern object-oriented language.
369
Computer Organization
Organization of a simple stored-program computer: CPU, busses and memory. Instruction sets, machine code, and assembly language. Conventions for assembly language generated by compilers. Floating-point number representation. Hardware organization. Address translation and virtual memory. Input/output devices, computer interfacing, interrupt handling and multi-tasking systems.
467
Digital Electronic Circuits
MOS transistor fundamentals (D.C. characteristics, large signal model, transient behaviour). Transistor level implementation of standard MOS logic gates. Other MOS logic blocks. MOS memory (static and dynamic). Interfacing various logic families. Introduction to integrated circuit design.
501
Principles of Computer Architecture
Impacts of integrated circuit technology on processor and memory system design and performance. Tradeoffs in instruction set design. Caches. Virtual memory. Enhancement of instruction throughput with instruction-level, data-level, and thread-level parallelism. Introduction to multicore microarchitecture and programming.
507
Computer Aided Design of Integrated Circuits
Development of Computer-Aided Design (CAD) tools for digital circuits, algorithmic definition and design; partitioning, clustering, placement routing and timing techniques for digital circuits; applications in other areas of engineering.
509
Fundamentals of Biometric Systems Design
Biometric systems, sensors and devices, Integration of Biometric-based hardware and software, Biometric applications.
511
Embedded System Interfacing
Review of computer architecture; microcontrollers and their instruction sets; interfacing using common input/output devices, debugging and other software engineering practices, strategies for interrupt handling and exception handling; Interfacing using high level and assembly languages; software and hardware optimizations to achieve real time operations; real time operating systems; Embedded real-time applications.
515
Digital Signal Processors
Review of microprocessor fundamentals. Comparison of basic system architectures for RISC, CISC and DSP processors, recent architectural innovations. Processor characteristics needed to match the requirements for typical DSP applications. Hardware and software optimization techniques including multiple busses, register windows, super-scalar and other highly parallel instruction sets, critical timing paths, optimizing compilers and multi-processor operation. Fundamental comparison of custom and current commercial single chip DSP processor architectures. Elements of Hardware-Software co-design and development processes. Practical applications and laboratories.
517
Computer Arithmetic and Computational Complexity
Analyzing the complexity of computer arithmetic algorithms, fundamental issues concerning computational complexity problems with applications to engineering problems, including signal and image processing, cryptography and data mining.
519
Special Topics in Computer Engineering
Current topics in computer engineering.
Computer Science
111
203
Introduction to Problem Solving using Application Software
Introduction to computer fundamentals; contemporary topics, such as security and privacy, and the Internet and World Wide Web. Problem solving, analysis and design using application software such as spreadsheets.
217
Introduction to Computer Science for Multidisciplinary Studies I
Introduction to problem solving, analysis and design of small-scale computational systems and implementation using a procedural programming language. For students wishing to combine studies in computer science with studies in other disciplines.
219
Introduction to Computer Science for Multidisciplinary Studies II
Continuation of Introduction to Computer Science for Multidisciplinary Studies I. Emphasis on object oriented analysis and design of small-scale computational systems and implementation using an object oriented language. Issues of design, modularization and programming style will be emphasized.
231
Introduction to Computer Science for Computer Science Majors I
Introduction to problem solving, the analysis and design of small-scale computational systems, and implementation using a procedural programming language. For computer science majors.
233
Introduction to Computer Science for Computer Science Majors II
Continuation of Introduction to Computer Science for Computer Science Majors I. Emphasis on object-oriented analysis and design of small-scale computational systems and implementation using an object oriented language. Issues of design, modularization, and programming style will be emphasized.
235
Advanced Introduction to Computer Science
An accelerated introduction to problem solving, the analysis and design of small-scale computational systems and implementation using both procedural and object oriented programming languages. Issues of design, modularization, and programming style will be emphasized.
313
Introduction to Computability
An introduction to abstract models of sequential computation, including finite automata, regular expressions, context-free grammars, and Turing machines. Formal languages, including regular, context-free, and recursive languages, methods for classifying languages according to these types, and relationships among these classes.
319
Data Structures, Algorithms, and Their Applications
Fundamental data structures, including arrays, lists, stacks, queues, trees, hash tables, and graphs. Algorithms for searching and sorting. Applications of these data structures and algorithms. For students wishing to combine studies in computer science with studies in other disciplines.
329
Explorations in Information Security and Privacy
A broad survey of topics in information security and privacy, with the purpose of cultivating an appropriate mindset for approaching security and privacy issues. Topics will be motivated by recreational puzzles. Legal and ethical considerations will be introduced as necessary.
331
Data Structures, Algorithms, and Their Analysis
Fundamental data structures, including arrays, lists, stacks, queues, trees, hash tables, and graphs. Algorithms for searching and sorting. Introduction to the correctness and analysis of algorithms. For computer science majors and those interested in algorithm design and analysis, information security, and other mathematically-intensive areas.
335
Intermediate Information Structures

355
Computing Machinery I
An introduction to computing machinery establishing the connection between programs expressed in a compiled language, an assembly language, and machine code, and how such code is executed. Includes the detailed study of a modern CPU architecture, its assembly language and internal data representation, and the relationship between high-level program constructs and machine operations.
359
Computing Machinery II
An introduction to hardware and microprocessor design, including the connection between gate-level digital logic circuits and sequential machines that can execute an algorithm and perform input and output.
399
Special Topics in Computer Science
Exploration of various areas in Computer Science. Topics will vary from year-to-year. It will be offered as required to provide the opportunity for students to engage in additional areas in Computer Science. Before registration, consult the Department of Computer Science for topics offered.
405
Software Entrepreneurship
Development of business models, building software prototypes and creation of pitch presentations to create a software-based business.
409
History of Computation
The history of computation from the earliest times to the modern era.
411
Compiler Construction
Introduction to compilers, interpreters, and the tools for parsing and translation. Lexical analysis, context free grammars and software tools for their recognition. Attribute grammars and their applications in translation and compiling.
413
Design and Analysis of Algorithms I
Techniques for the analysis of algorithms, including counting, summation, recurrences, and asymptotic relations; techniques for the design of efficient algorithms, including greedy methods, divide and conquer, and dynamic programming; examples of their application; an introduction to tractable and intractable problems.
418
Introduction to Cryptography
The basics of cryptography, with emphasis on attaining well-defined and practical notations of security. Symmetric and public key cryptosystems; one-way and trapdoor functions; mechanisms for data integrity; digital signatures; key management; applications to the design of cryptographic systems. In addition to written homework, assessment will involve application programming; additional mathematical theory and proof-oriented exercises will be available for extra credit.
433
Artificial Intelligence
An examination of the objectives, key techniques and achievements of work on artificial intelligence in Computer Science.
441
Computer Networks
Principles and practice in modern telecommunications, computer communications and networks. Layered communication protocols and current physical, data link, network and Internet protocol layers. Circuit switching, packet switching, and an introduction to broadband multimedia networking.
449
Programming Paradigms
Examination of the basic principles of the major programming language paradigms. Focus on declarative paradigms such as functional and logic programming. Data types, control expressions, loops, types of references, lazy evaluation, different interpretation principles, information hiding.
453
Introduction to Computer Graphics
Introduction to computer graphics. Principles of raster image generation. Example of a graphics API. Graphics primitives. Co-ordinate systems, affine transformations and viewing of graphical objects. Introduction to rendering including shading models and ray tracing. Introduction to modelling including polygon meshes, subdivision, and parametric curves and surfaces.
457
Principles of Operating Systems
An introduction to operating systems principles. Performance measurement; concurrent programs; the management of information, memory and processor resources.
461
Information Structures
File architecture and manipulation techniques for various file types. Physical characteristics of current mass storage devices. Advanced data structures and algorithms for implementing various sequential and hierarchical file structures. File organization and design for various applications, file systems and other storage management techniques including website design.
471
Data Base Management Systems
Conceptual, internal and external data bases. Relational data base systems and SQL. The normal forms, data base design, and the entity-relationship approach.
481
Human-Computer Interaction I
Fundamental theory and practice of the design, implementation, and evaluation of human-computer interfaces. Topics include: principles of design; methods for evaluating interfaces with or without user involvement; techniques for prototyping and implementing graphical user interfaces.
491
Techniques for Numerical Computation
Elementary techniques for the numerical solution of mathematical problems on a computer, including methods for solving linear and non-linear equations, numerical integration, and interpolation.
499
Special Topics in Computer Science
Exploration of various areas in Computer Science. Topics will vary from year-to-year. It will be offered as required to provide the opportunity for students to engage in additional areas in Computer Science. Before registration, consult the Department of Computer Science for topics offered.
501
Advanced Programming Techniques
Theory and application of advanced programming methods and tools. Recent issues as well as those of an enduring nature will be discussed.
502
Research Project

503
Project

511
Introduction to Complexity Theory
Time and space complexity; the classes P, LOGSPACE, PSPACE and their nondeterministic counterparts; containments and separations between complexity classes; intractability and the theory of NP-completeness; complexity theories for probabilistic algorithms and for parallel algorithms.
513
Computability
Computable functions; decidable and undecidable problems; Church's thesis and recursive functions.
517
Design and Analysis of Algorithms II
Advanced techniques for the design and analysis of deterministic and probabilistic algorithms; techniques for deriving lower bounds on the complexity of problems.
518
Introduction to Computer Algebra
Fundamental problems, classical and modern algorithms, and algorithm design and analysis techniques of use in computer algebra. Integer and polynomial arithmetic. Additional problems in computer algebra, possibly including problems in computational linear algebra, factorization, and concerning systems of polynomial equations will be considered as time permits.
519
Introduction to Quantum Computation
Introduction to quantum computing. Quantum algorithms, quantum search, quantum fourier transforms, quantum error correcting codes, quantum cryptography, nonlocality and quantum communication complexity, and quantum computational complexity.
521
Foundations of Functional Programming
Theoretical foundations of functional programming: the lambda-calculus, beta-reduction, confluence, and reduction strategies. Programming syntax: solving recursive equations with the Y-combinator, let and letrec, types, datatypes, and patterns. Programming in a functional language: recursion patterns, useful combinators, maps, and folds, for datatypes. Example applications: recursive descent parsing, unification, combinatorial algorithms, theorem proving.
522
Introduction to Randomized Algorithms
Techniques for the design and analysis of randomized algorithms; discrete probability theory; randomized data structures; lower bound techniques; randomized complexity classes; advanced algorithmic applications from various areas.
525
Principles of Computer Security
Security policies and protection mechanisms for a computing system, including such topics as design principles of protection systems, authentication and authorization, reference monitors, security architecture of popular platforms, formal modelling of protection systems, discretionary access control, safety analysis, information flow control, integrity, role-based access control. Legal and ethical considerations will be introduced.
526
Network Systems Security
Attacks on networked systems, tools and techniques for detection and protection against attacks including firewalls and intrusion detection and protection systems, authentication and identification in distributed systems, cryptographic protocols for IP networks, security protocols for emerging networks and technologies, privacy enhancing communication. Legal and ethical issues will be introduced.
527
Computer Viruses and Malware
Study of computer viruses, worms, Trojan horses, and other forms of malicious software. Countermeasures to malicious software. Legal and ethical issues, and some general computer and network security issues.
528
Spam and Spyware
Spam and other unsolicited bulk electronic communication, and spyware. Legal and ethical issues. Countermeasures and related security problems.
530
Information Theory and Security
Information theoretic concepts such as entropy and mutual information and their applications to defining and evaluating information security systems including encryption, authentication, secret sharing and secure message transmission.
531
Systems Modelling and Simulation
An introduction to the modelling and simulation of stochastic systems; programming language issues; model and tool design; input data modelling; simulation experiments; and the interpretation of simulation results.
535
Introduction to Image Analysis and Computer Vision
Standard methods used in the analysis of digital images. Image acquisition and display: visual perception; digital representation. Sampling and enhancement. Feature extraction and classification methods. Object recognition.
550
Systems Administration
Topics and practices in systems administration and management. Required and optional administration duties and responsibilities. Moral and ethical conundrums, and legal responsibilities, in systems operation. Configuration and installation of operating systems and network and systems services.
559
Introduction to Distributed Systems
Designing and implementing distributed systems that overcome challenges due to concurrent computation, failure of components in the system and heterogeneity of processors and communication channels.
561
Introduction to Distributed Algorithms
Basic problems in distributed systems such as symmetry breaking, consensus, resource allocation, and synchronization. The impact of system characteristics, such as models of communication, timing and failure, and of solution requirements, such as correctness and complexity criteria and algorithmic constraints, on the computability and complexity of these problems. Techniques for solving problems under different models will be emphasized.
565
Emergent Computing
An insight into a new mindset for programming as an emergent and evolutionary process of "breeding," rather than constructing. Programs can evolve to perform specific tasks in a bottom-up fashion rather than being manually coded. Topics will include: decentralized agent-based programming, massive parallelism and interaction, evolution, swarm intelligence.
567
Foundations of Multi-Agent Systems
Modelling of agents and properties of multi-agent systems. Communication issues, including interaction and co-ordination concepts, forming and maintaining organizations, and competitive agent environments. Example systems; the implementation of a multi-agent system will be performed as the assignment.
568
Agent Communications
An examination of communication paradigms in multi-agent systems. A number of paradigms will be covered including simple protocols, BDI (Believe, Desire, Intension), and social commitments.
571
Design and Implementation of Database Systems
Implementation and design of modern database systems including query modification/optimization, recovery, concurrency, integrity, and distribution.
572
Fundamentals of Social Network Analysis and Data Mining
Introduction to data mining with emphasis on frequent pattern mining, clustering and classification, data collection, network construction, basic graph theory concepts and network analysis metrics, and case studies.
575
iProgramming for Creative Minds
Design, develop and market apps. This course has a focus on developing, implementing and evaluating ideas in teams and gaining entrepreneurial skills for software development and marketing.
577
Biometric Technologies
Principles of biometric system design, technology and performance evaluation. Verification, identification and synthesis in biometrics. Traditional and emerging techniques for fingerprint matching, face recognition, iris modelling, signature authentication, and biometric pattern recognition. Multi-modal biometrics and information fusion. Privacy and ethics considerations in deployment of biometric systems.
581
Human-Computer Interaction II
Intermediate and advanced topics and applications in human-computer interaction, to further one's skills for designing highly interactive human-computer interfaces.
583
Introduction to Information Visualization
Principles of information representation, presentation and interaction. Development of mappings from data to visual structures and exploration, navigation, cues, distortion and emphasis techniques.
584
Human-Robot Interaction
Introduction to the design, implementation and evaluation of human-robot interfaces. Topics include the evaluation of human-robot interaction (HRI), theoretical, philosophical and ethical issues, exploration of applications and tasks, prototyping HRI tools, and practical implementation and evaluation methods.
585
Games Programming
Standard techniques for the implementation of computer games. Standard multimedia programming environments and high performance multimedia. Special purpose rendering engines. Interactive control and feedback; modelling.
587
Fundamentals of Computer Animation
Principles of traditional animation, key framing, parametric and track animation, free form deformation, inverse kinematics, dynamics, spring mass systems, particle systems, numerical integration, Lagrangian constraints, space time constraints, collisions, human animation, behavioural animation, metamorphosis, implicit animation techniques, animating liquids, gases and cloth, motion capture.
589
Modelling for Computer Graphics
Parametric Modelling. B-splines and NURBS. Subdivision schemes. Surface subdivision. Multiresolution. Wavelets. Implicit modelling. Blends. Polygonization. Blobtree. Precise contact modelling. Solid modelling. CSG. Procedural modelling. Special topics, e.g. Differential geometry. Graph-based modelling. Topology.
591
Rendering
Physical foundations of illuminations techniques. Colour. Radiometry and photometry. Reflection models. The rendering equation. Ray tracing. Monte Carlo techniques. Sampling and antialiasing. Texturing. Radiosity. Photon tracing. Volume rendering. Image-based rendering. Real-time shading.
594
Software Engineering Project
A software engineering project conducted under the guidance of a faculty member.
598
Special Topics in Computer Science
New areas in Computer Science. It will be offered only as required. Before registration consult the Department of Computer Science for topics offered.
599
Special Topics in Computer Science
Exploration of various areas in Computer Science. Topics will vary from year-to-year. It will be offered as required to provide the opportunity for students to engage in additional areas in Computer Science. Before registration, consult the Department of Computer Science for topics offered.
601
Special Topics in Computer Science
A study of problems of particular interest to graduate students in Computer Science.
605
Information Storage and Processing in Biological Systems
Examination of complex biological systems; concepts and fundamentals of biological solutions to information storage and processing; modelling and computer simulation of biological systems; information storage in biological molecules; genetic networks; hierarchical organization of biological information processing in signal transduction, development, evolution, and ecology; biological control systems.
607
Biological Computation
Examination and modelling of biological networks; focus on the latest developments in biological computing and their theoretical backgrounds, such as: DNA computing; genomic algorithms; artificial chemistries; complex adaptive systems, chaos and fractals; immune system computing; gene regulatory networks; swarm intelligence systems.
609
Foundations of Multi-Agent Systems
Modelling of agents and properties of multi-agent systems. Communication issues, including interaction and co-ordination concepts, forming and maintaining organizations, and competitive agent environments. Example systems; the implementation of a multi-agent system will be performed as the assignment.
610
Compiler Code Generation and Optimization
Compiler code generation and optimization techniques, including register allocation, instruction selection, dataflow analysis, and code optimization techniques using intermediate representations. Implementation of special language features and tools for automated code generation.
611
Complexity Theory
Deterministic and non-deterministic time and space complexity; complexity classes and hierarchies; NP-complete problems and intractable problems; axiomatic complexity theory.
615
Computational Techniques for Graphics and Visualization
Various case studies from the fields of graphics and visualization. Topics in numerical linear algebra, numerical optimization, and discrete differential geometry.
617
Category Theory for Computer Science
Introduction to category theory with applications in computer science. Functors, natural transformations, adjoints and monads, initial and final algebras. Introduction to 2-categories and fibrations.
619
Quantum Computation
Introduction to quantum computing. Quantum algorithms, quantum search, quantum fourier transforms, quantum error correcting codes, quantum cryptography, nonlocality and quantum communication complexity, and quantum computational complexity.
622
Randomized Algorithms
Design and analysis of randomized algorithms; discrete probability theory; randomized data structures; lower bound techniques; randomized complexity classes; advanced algorithmic applications from various areas.
625
Principles of Computer Security
Security policies and protection mechanisms for a computing system, including such topics as design principles of protection systems, authentication and authorization, reference monitors, security architecture of popular platforms, formal modelling of protection systems, discretionary access control, safety analysis, information flow control, integrity, role-based access control. Legal and ethical considerations will be introduced as necessary.
626
Network Systems Security
Attacks on networked systems, tools and techniques for detection and protection against attacks including firewalls and intrusion detection and protection systems, authentication and identification in distributed systems, cryptographic protocols for IP networks, security protocols for emerging networks and technologies, privacy enhancing communication. Legal and ethical issues will be introduced as necessary.
627
Computer Viruses and Malware
Study of computer viruses, worms, Trojan horses, and other forms of malicious software. Countermeasures to malicious software. Legal and ethical issues, and some general computer and network security issues.
628
Spam and Spyware
Spam and other unsolicited bulk electronic communication, and spyware. Legal and ethical issues. Countermeasures, and related security problems.
629
Elliptic Curves and Cryptography
An introduction to elliptic curves over the rationals and finite fields. The focus is on both theoretical and computational aspects; subjects covered will include the study of endomorphism rings, Weil pairing, torsion points, group structure, and effective implementation of point addition. Applications to cryptography will be discussed, including elliptic curve-based Diffie-Helman key exchange, El Gamal encryption, and digital signatures, as well as the associated computational problems on which their security is based.
630
Information Theory and Security
Information theoretic concepts such as entropy and mutual information, and their applications to defining and evaluating information security systems including encryption, authentication, secret sharing and secure message transmission.
635
Image Analysis and Computer Vision
Standard methods used in the analysis of digital images. Image acquisition and display: visual perception; digital representation. Sampling and enhancement. Feature extraction and classification methods. Object recognition.
641
Performance Issues in High Speed Networks
An overview of current research in high speed networks. Topics covered will include the current Internet, the future Internet, wireless networks, optical networks, Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), TCP/IP, network traffic measurement, web server performance, and mobile computing. Emphasis will be placed on network performance issues for next-generation Internet protocols and applications.
643
Modern Wireless Networks
An introduction to the fundamentals and applications of wireless networks.
653
Computational Geometry
Geometric searching, hull proximity and intersection data structures and algorithms and their complexity.
657
Modelling And Visualization of Plants
Modelling, simulation and visualization of plants for computer graphics and biological purposes. Modelling of plants as an example of interdisciplinary research including computer science, biology, mathematics and physics. L-systems as a formal basis for model construction. Modelling languages. Information flow in plants. Symmetry, self-similarity and allometry of plants. Descriptive models of plant architecture. Models integrating plant structure and function. Simulation of plant development. Case studies: competition for space, phyllotaxis, tropisms, and biomechanical considerations. Reaction-diffusion models of morphogensis. Genotype-to-phenotype mapping. Modelling of plant ecosystems. Rendering and visualization of the models. A survey of applications and research directions.
661
Algorithms for Distributed Computation
Fundamental algorithmic problems in distributed computation; impact of communication, timing, failures and other characteristics on computability and complexity of solutions.
662
Agent Communications
An examination of communication paradigms in multi-agent systems. A number of paradigms will be covered including simple protocols, BDI (Believe, Desire, Intension), and social commitments.
667
Computer Algebra
Fundamental problems, classical and modern algorithms, and algorithm design and analysis techniques of use in computer algebra. Integer and polynomial arithmetic. Additional problems in computer algebra, possibly including problems in computational linear algebra, factorization, and concerning systems of polynomial equations will be considered as time permits.
669
Cryptography
An overview of the basic techniques in modern cryptography, with emphasis on fit-for-application primitives and protocols. Topics will include symmetric and public-key cryptosystems; digital signatures; elliptic curve cryptography; key management; attack models and well-defined notions of security.
671
Database Management Systems
Foundations of database applications and database systems, plus some advanced topics in data management systems will be introduced.
672
Fundamentals of Social Network Analysis and Data Mining
Introduction to data mining with emphasis on frequent pattern mining, clustering and classification, data collection, network construction, basic graph theory concepts and network analysis metrics, and case studies.
673
Distributed Database Systems
Introduction to distributed database systems. Topics covered include: architecture, data design, query processing, transaction management, multidatabases, object-oriented databases and advanced system issues.
675
Datawarehouse Systems
Design, development and deployment of datawarehouses. Schemas, models, data organization, OLAP, tuning, data mining and architectural models may be discussed.
681
Research Methods in Human-Computer Interaction
Application of the theory and methodology of human-machine studies to real systems; theory and practice.
683
Information Visualization: Theory and Practice
The theory and development of interactive visual representations of abstract data for the purpose of amplifying cognition. Topics covered can include representational issues, perceptual issues, visual literacy, spatial abstraction, and interaction issues.
687
Computer Animation
Principles of traditional animation, key framing, parametric and track animation, free form deformation, inverse kinematics, dynamics, spring mass systems, particle systems, numerical integration, Lagrangian constraints, space time constraints, collisions, human animation, behavioural animation, metamorphosis, implicit animation techniques, animating liquids, gases and cloth, motion capture.
689
Modelling for Computer Graphics
Parametric Modelling. B-splines and NURBS. Subdivision schemes. Surface subdivision. Multiresolution. Wavelets. Implicit modelling. Blends. Polygonization. Blobtree. Precise contact modelling. Solid modelling. CSG. Procedural modelling. Special topics, e.g. Differential geometry. Graph-based modelling. Topology.
691
Rendering
Physical foundations of illuminations techniques. Colour. Radiometry and photometry. Reflection models. The rendering equation. Ray tracing. Monte Carlo techniques. Sampling and antialiasing. Texturing. Radiosity. Photon tracing. Volume rendering. Image-based rendering. Real-time shading.
695
Data Management in Geographical Information Systems
Examination of advanced geometric algorithms for representation, analysis and visualization of Geographical Information Systems. Data structures such as progressive mesh, ROAM, multidimensional Delauney triangulization, quadtree and space partitioning. Algorithmic techniques such as incremental, divide and conquer, sweep-plane, and dimension reduction. Algorithms for surface simplification, culling, quality measurement and reduction.
696
Information Security Seminar
Topics in information security, such as security management, emerging threats, research frontiers using case studies and best practices.
697
Biometric Security
Principles of biometric system design, technology and performance evaluation. Verification, identification and synthesis in biometrics. Traditional and emerging techniques for fingerprint matching, face recognition, iris modelling, signature authentication, and biometric pattern recognition. Multi-modal biometrics and biometric security.
698
Information Security Project
An information security project conducted under the guidance of a faculty member. A report must be written and presented on completion of the course.
699
Research Methodology in Computer Science
An introduction to and survey of research areas and methods in Computer Science. Professional skills in computer science research such as reviewing, critical evaluation, and the preparation of research proposals.
701
Research Topics in Computer Science
In-depth course on a focused current research topic in Computer Science. Involves a significant research component and requires substantial background knowledge.
767
Advanced Topics in Multiagent Systems
An in-depth study of a selected subfield of multiagent systems including state-of-the-art research. This is a project-driven course.
771
Current Trends in Database Technology
Advanced topics chosen from Bioinformatics, Data mining, Mobile Databases, Spatial Databases and Web Databases. There is a large project component.
781
Advanced Topics in Human-Computer Interaction
The topics covered will change year-by-year depending on current advances in human computer interaction.
785
Implicit Modelling
A detailed look at modelling using implicit and iso-surface techniques taking an in-depth review of the literature. Algebraic methods will be followed by skeletal models, field function design, modelling techniques, rendering and texture mapping. Polygonisation algorithms, ray tracing implicits, techniques for animation, meta-morphosis, precise contact modelling, deformation and warping. Algorithms and data structures and implementation details will be presented. Students will be expected to make a new contribution in their project and term paper.
789
Advanced Geometric Modelling
Current research topics including spline modelling, Subdivision Surfaces, multiresolution, wavelets, analysis of the subdivision surfaces and reverse subdivision.
Co-operative Education
5
501
Co-operative Placement in Actuarial Science

503
Co-operative Placement in Applied Chemistry

511
Co-operative Placement in Arts

523
Co-operative Placement in Business

543
Co-operative Placement in Ecology

Dance
64
201
Introductory Contemporary Dance I
Introductory study of the techniques of contemporary dance.
205
Introductory Contemporary Dance II
Further introductory study of the techniques of contemporary dance.
207
Elementary Contemporary Dance I
Elementary study of the techniques of contemporary dance.
209
Elementary Contemporary Dance II
Further elementary study of the techniques of contemporary dance.
211
Introductory Jazz Dance
Introductory study of the techniques of jazz dance.
213
Introductory Jazz Dance II
Further introductory study of the techniques of jazz dance.
215
Hip Hop I
Introductory study of the techniques of hip hop.
217
Hip Hop II
Intermediate study of the techniques of hip hop.
221
Introductory Ballet I
Introductory study of the techniques of ballet.
223
Introductory Ballet II
Further introductory study of the techniques of ballet.
235
Safe Dance Practice and Complementary Training
Training principles and components of physical fitness in safe dance practice as they apply to training optimization and injury prevention in dance.
243
Dance in Popular Culture
Survey of social dance forms from World War I to present.
247
Introduction to Creative Process
A creation-based course in basic movement analysis and creative process focusing on the identification and development of personal movement preferences.
267
Dance Aesthetics, Criticism and Analysis
Introduction to the practice of dance writing through an aesthetic-comparative, critical and analytic lens.
295
Dance Performance Practicum I
Practical experience in dance performance.
303
Principles of Technique
Reinforcement of the basic principles of contemporary dance in preparation for more advanced study.
305
Elementary Contemporary Dance III
This completes the elementary sequence in the techniques of contemporary dance.
307
Intermediate Contemporary Dance I
Intermediate study of the techniques of contemporary dance.
309
Special Topics in Dance Theory I
Introductory study of topics in dance theory, including Canadian Dance History, Dance Aesthetics and Criticism, and Dance Ethnography.
311
Elementary Jazz Dance I
Elementary study of the techniques of jazz dance.
313
Elementary Jazz Dance II
Further elementary study of the techniques of jazz dance.
321
Elementary Ballet I
Elementary study of the techniques of ballet.
323
Elementary Ballet II
Further elementary study of the techniques of ballet.
331
Creative Process I: Improvisation
A practical study of movement improvisation as a critical component of creative process with emphasis on improvisation as a performance practice and as a tool for creation.
333
Creative Process II: Solo Forms
A practical application of contemporary models of dance-making with a focus on articulating individualized movement language in the solo form.
341
Early Dance History
Historical survey of dance: origins through the nineteenth century.
343
Special Topics in Dance Practices I
Possible topics include Contact Improvisation, African Dance, Mixed Ability Dance, Site Specific Dance.
345
Twentieth-Century Dance History
Historical survey of western theatre dance.
347
Modern and Contemporary Dance History
In depth study of western modern and contemporary dance theatre practices with particular focus on twentieth century to present.
359
Dance Anatomy
Functional anatomy of the skeletal and muscular systems as they apply to training optimization and injury prevention in dance.
363
Dance Science
The scientific study of dance and the practical application of scientific principles to dance practice.
365
Pilates Conditioning
Study of the Pilates method of conditioning utilizing the Pilates Reformer apparatus.
375
Complementary Dance Training Practices I
Study of complementary training practices for improving dance performance.
391
Dance and the Camera
An introduction to making dances for the camera incorporating composing dance for the frame, basic camera skills, story board organization, and basic editing skills, as well as viewing and analysis of dances on film and video.
395
Dance Performance Practicum II
Further practical experience in dance performance.
397
Dance Performance Practicum III
Intermediate  practical experience in dance performance.
405
Intermediate Contemporary Dance II
Further intermediate study of the techniques of contemporary dance.
407
Intermediate Contemporary Dance III
This completes the sequence of intermediate study of the techniques of contemporary dance.
411
Intermediate Jazz Dance I
Intermediate study of the techniques of jazz dance.
413
Intermediate Jazz Dance II
Further intermediate study of the techniques of jazz dance.
421
Intermediate Ballet I
Intermediate study of the techniques of ballet.
423
Intermediate Ballet II
Further intermediate study of the techniques of ballet.
427
Cross-Cultural Currents: Embodying Global Dance
Experiential survey of dance practices from around the world.
431
Creative Process III: Choreography
Continuing focus on developing choreographic structures that support clear artistic statements, with an emphasis on the duet form.
433
Creative Process IV: Choreography
Further study in creating choreographic structures with an emphasis on group forms.
435
Creative Process V: Research Creation
Continued study of dance composition introducing concepts of practice-as-research for choreographic creation and analysis. A focus on how to develop new methodologies that integrate theory and practice with a goal toward both written and choreographic outputs.
437
Dance Dramaturgy
Strategies of creation and composition are examined through theory and practice, with a focus on the invitation they extend to the audience, and in the context of the dance dramaturg’s facilitating role.
447
Dance Pedagogy: Community Populations
An overview of the approaches to dance pedagogy for teaching varied community populations, including adults, seniors, mixed ability and pre-school children etc.
449
Dance Pedagogy: Children and Youth
An overview of the approaches to dance pedagogy for teaching children and youth in public schools and studio contexts.
465
Dance Psychology
An examination of the affective relationships between dance and the cognitive capacities: perception; memory; and learning.
475
Complementary Dance Training Practices II
Focus on select methods of complementary training practices for improving dance performance.
481
Cross-Cultural Currents: Theorising Dancing Bodies
Critical dance theory and global dance forms.
491
Design and Production for Dance
An overview of the essential skills required to light, present and produce dance performance.
493
Dance Teaching Practicum
Practical experience teaching dance in school and recreational settings.
495
Dance Performance Practicum IV
Advanced practical experience in dance performance.
503
Special Topics in Dance Theory II
Advanced study of topics in dance theory, including Dance and the Camera, Research Methods, and Cultural Approaches to Dance Studies.
505
Advanced Contemporary Dance I
Advanced study of the techniques of contemporary dance.
507
Advanced Contemporary Dance II
Further advanced study of the techniques of contemporary dance.
531
Senior Project
Senior choreographic and/or performance project.
571
Directed Studies

574
Travel Study
An international perspective on dance training, performance and culture.
581
Special Topics in Dance Practices II
Possible topics include site specific dance, collaborative creation.
591
Professional Development
Professional development opportunity with a local professional dance organization.
681
Special Topics in Dance

Dance Education
1
325
Dance in Schools
Content, planning, and teaching methodology in school dance.
Data Science
21
201
Thinking with Data
An introduction to tools and techniques for managing, visualizing, and making sense of data. Includes an introduction to data cleaning, basic statistics, exploratory visualization, sensemaking, and data presentation.
211
Programming with Data
A hands-on introduction to basic coding skills, including core programming concepts and the fundamentals of reading, writing, and executing code – with a focus on data manipulation. Emphasizes important tools and practices for programming with data, including development environments, source control, and debugging.
305
Computational Statistical Modelling
Random variables and their probability models. The Central Limit Theorem and parameter estimation. Statistical modelling of univariate and multivariate data with applications to discrete and continuous data. Data transformations. Introduction to simulation-based inference including randomization and permutation tests.
311
Data Processing and Storage
An introduction to fundamental data structures, including lists, stacks, trees, hash tables, and graphs, and their application for data processing, analysis, and storage. Covers the fundamental design and use of relational databases, with an emphasis on SQL.
501
Data Science Capstone
A substantial research project in the field of Data Science. The project will consist of all of the elements in the data cycle: collection, cleaning, exploratory analysis, statistical and computational analysis and presentation.
601
Working with Data and Visualization
An introduction to fundamental data science concepts including basic data organization, data collection, and data cleaning. Includes a review of basic programming concepts in Python, as well as an introduction to the fundamentals of data visualization and critical thinking with data. Also provides an introduction to data ethics, security, and privacy.
602
Statistical Data Analysis
An introduction to the foundations of statistical inference including the application of probability models to data, as well as an introduction to simulation-based and classical statistical inference, and the creation of statistical models with R.
603
Statistical Modelling with Data
An introduction to the creation of complex statistical models, including exposure to multivariate model selection, prediction, the statistical design of experiments and analysis of data in R.
604
Big Data Management
An introduction to data storage and manipulation at both desktop and cloud scales. Introduces core database concepts and provides a practical introduction to both SQL and NoSQL systems. Also introduces parallel and distributed computing concepts including distributed storage and large scale parallel data processing using MapReduce. Design and implementation of new data visualizations to aid analysis, with emphasis on the practical and ethical implications of design and analysis decisions.
605
Actionable Visualization and Analytics
Introduces deeper tools, skills, and techniques for collecting, manipulating, visualizing, analyzing, and presenting a number of different common types of data. With a data life-cycle perspective, looks into data elicitation and preparation as well as the actual usage of data in a decision-making context. Introduces techniques for visualizing and supporting the interactive analysis and decision making on large complex datasets. Focus on critical thinking and good analysis practices to avoid cognitive biases when designing, thinking, analyzing, and making decisions based on data.
606
Statistical Methods in Data Science
Design of surveys and data collection, bias and efficiency of surveys. Sampling weights and variance estimation. Multi-way contingency tables and introduction to generalized linear models with emphasis on applications.
607
Statistical and Machine Learning
Advancement of the linear statistical model including introduction to data transformation methods, classification, model assessment and selection. Exposure to both supervised learning and unsupervised learning.
608
Developing Big Data Applications
Provides advanced coverage of tools and techniques for big data management and for processing, mining, and building applications that leverage large datasets. Addresses database and distributed storage design for both SQL and NoSQL systems, and focuses on the application of distributed computing tools to perform data integration, apply machine learning, and build applications that leverage big data. Students will also examine the security and ethical implications of large-scale data collection and analysis.
611
Predictive Analytics
Overview of the basic concepts and techniques in predictive analytics as well as their applications for solving real-life business problems in marketing, finance, and other areas. Techniques covered in this course include: decision trees, classification rules, association rules, clustering, support vector machines, instance-based learning. Examples and cases are discussed to gain hands-on experience.
612
Decision Analytics
Introduces fundamental concepts and modelling approaches to solve problems that are faced by decision makers in today’s fast-paced and data-rich business environment. Different decision alternatives are analyzed and evaluated with the use of computer models. Topics include the most commonly used applied optimization, simulation and decision analysis techniques. Extensive use will be made of appropriate computer software for problem solving, principally with spreadsheets.
613
Introductory Data Analytics
Introduction to new tools for data analytics that can be used to discover, collect, organize, and clean the data to make it ready for analysis. Emphasis is placed on software tools used to interact with data sources and provision of user skills to create business applications that encompass a variety of business data sources; such as customers, suppliers, markets, competitors, and regulators. Software packages used to clean and organize the data for analysis will be introduced, as well as software to enable users’ understanding of the data that is collected.
614
Advanced Data Analytics
Examination of tools and methods used in data analysis, including basic and advanced analytic tools, as well as machine learning techniques. One or more data analysis packages/programs are used to analyze different types of business data. Statistical and other analytic methods, such as data mining, machine learning and various techniques, and their application to business data analytics are explored.
621
Advanced Statistical Modelling
An introduction to the fundamental statistical methods used in health data science including interpretation and communicating the results of these methods. Explores modelling using an epidemiological paradigm such as the assessment for modification and confounding. Introduces fundamental health research methods including study design and the evidence hierarchy.
622
Machine Learning for Health Data Science
An introduction to the application of machine learning methods to problems in health data. The concepts of precision medicine and precision public health are introduced and the role of data science in these endeavors is explored. Using real examples from health data., various contemporary machine learning techniques are taught.
623
Big Data in Health
Many of the major health data assets that exist in Alberta and Canada will be explored through hands-on experience with several datasets. Issues relating to access, confidentiality, privacy and data stewardship will be examined. Methodological challenges related to data linkage will be discussed. Students will work with large health databases including health administrative data, electronic medical record data and various other databases.
624
Advanced Exploration and Visualization in Health
Explores the synthesis and summary of large volumes of information into interpretable and compelling results. Software packages useful for visualization of data are examined, including software for geographic information systems, augmented reality, and infographics. Data Science software commonly used in health industry is examined. Fundamental design principles are introduced to guide the approach to data presentation, communication, and interpretation.
Development Studies
13
201
Introduction to Development Studies
An interdisciplinary course focusing on development in both a northern and international context. Explores factors that shape development processes; introduces concepts and issues such as poverty; colonialism and self-determination; human ecology and sustainable development; and appropriate technology. Examines the origins, purposes, and performance of contemporary national and international institutions and their effect on people in different geographical and socio-economic contexts.
301
Topics in Development Studies
Examination of selected issues in Development Studies.
302
Community Development
Examines the processes whereby communities take action to solve common problems in both urban and rural settings.
375
Gender and Development
Examines development from the critical perspective of the key role played by gender in development. Case studies from Canadian and international contexts will provide illustrative material for analyzing the issues that emanate from the gendered nature of development processes and practices.
393
Theories and Applications of Development
A study of development theories and applications through northern and international case studies. Examines practical manifestations of those theories and approaches in development planning, implementation, and praxis including Modernization theory; dependency theory; basic needs approach; neo-liberalism; the staple thesis; globalization; women in development; gender and development.
400
Field School
A field course for the on-site interdisciplinary study of a country or region with regard to issues of development from variety of perspectives, e.g., cultural, economic, environmental, geographical, historical and political perspectives.
401
Advanced Topics in Development Studies
An examination of selected topics in Development Studies at an advanced level.
403
Sustainability and Human Ecology in the Circumpolar Arctic
The history of northern development and resource management in Canada with emphasis on specific case studies involving sustainability and human ecology in the Circumpolar Arctic. The role of traditional environmental knowledge and its significance to northern development will be examined. Participatory research methodologies may be introduced.
405
Environment and Development
Critical engagement with sustainability through study of the intersections between environment and development, such as planning and development, management, and implementation, the political economy of environment, and political ecology. Topics may include political and economic systems, resource depletion, industrial agriculture, biodiversity, gender, hazards, traditional knowledge, and resistance.
485
International and Intercultural Communication
Examines cross-cultural communication at the personal, organizational, societal, and international levels. Discusses the concept of "Globalization" and its implications for communication among different cultures; analyses various theoretical perspectives underlying intercultural communication; explores issues of power, identity and influence; examines intercultural encounters in the context of specific diversified settings; and helps students develop intercultural communication competence.
501
Directed Research
Supervised individual study of a special topic.
591
Critical Perspectives on Development Practice and Research
An interdisciplinary consideration of selected issues and methodologies in development, providing the critical perspective and skills needed to conceptualize, design, implement and effectively manage community development projects and programs.
593
Honours Seminar in Development Studies
Current theoretical and methodological issues will be explored in a discussion-based seminar format, with the aim of development of a research project.
Drama
63
203
Creativity
From the economy to the environment and from politics to entertainment, creativity is an endlessly renewable resource that offers benefits for all citizens and may well be the most important human element for our future. Students from all disciplines can investigate the practices and processes of creativity and explore the ways in which it can help enrich their lives.
205
Story
An exploration of the elements of story present in the arts and beyond. Story is an exciting, creative, dynamic and universal form of human expression with the potential to engage and inspire students from across departments and disciplines.
209
Introduction to Acting I
An introduction to creative resources and practices for the actor.
210
Introduction to Acting II
An introduction to the actor’s interpretation and performance of texts for the theatre.
223
Introduction to Theatre Production
An introduction to organizational principles of theatre production and technical theatre skills.
225
Introduction to Scenography
An introduction to performance design and the disciplines within it: scenery, props, lighting, costumes and sound. Includes a study of the history of theatre design and space. Topics regarding contemporary notions of scenography will be explored, for example performance art, ritual, etc.
242
Introduction to the Study of Drama
An introduction to the study of drama, theatre and performance.
243
Introduction to the Practice of Drama
Continued study and practice of drama, theatre and performance.
301
Intermediate Acting I
Further development of fundamental acting techniques and creative processes essential to the actor’s craft. Introduction of voice and movement components for the actor.
302
Intermediate Acting II

313
Scenography I
Basic scenography including set, props, lighting and costume design theory, process and technique for a variety of theatre forms and performance styles.
317
Introduction to Stage Sound
Basic principles of sound for the theatre: recording, reinforcement and reproduction techniques and methods used in creating a production design.
319
Graphics and Model Building for Theatre
An introduction to graphic and model building techniques for the theatre designer.
320
Introduction to Lighting Design
Basic principles of lighting for live performance including conceptualization of the lighting approach, techniques in communication and skills in execution of a performance.
321
Stage Management
Principles of stage management; a stage management project related to one of the presentations in Drama's season of plays.
345
History of the Theatre: Origins to the Mid-Eighteenth Century
Theatre as an art and society phenomenon in selected cultures, emphasizing the development of Western traditions.
346
Seminar in Drama I
Critical examination of plays performed in Drama's season; staging requirements for contemporary productions and other works by the same authors and their contemporaries may also be studied.
347
History of the Theatre: The Late Eighteenth Century to the Present
Theatre as an art and social phenomenon in selected cultures, emphasizing the development of Western traditions from the late eighteenth century to the present.
348
Seminar in Drama II
Further development of skills and competencies, and critical and interpretive skills.
355
Introduction to Canadian Theatre and Drama
A study of Canadian theatre and performance using both formal and theoretical approaches.
360
Performance Creation I
Explorations in personal/group creative process; facilitation of performance forms that may include sound and movement exploration, storytelling, ritual, mask, puppetry, and the collaborative creation of original performance. Theory and history of performance creation is integrated with practical experience.
365
Theatre for Young Audiences I
Study of the history and production of Theatre for Young Audiences (TYA), as well as the creation of original performances. Exploration of performances techniques specific to TYA content, forms and venues.
367
Theatre for Young Audiences II
Advanced exploration of performances techniques specific to Theatre for Young Audiences (TYA) content, forms and venues. There is a performance component that includes tours in the community.
371
Introduction to Playwriting
Directed exercises in writing for the theatre; workshop sessions for developing and reworking material.
381
Topics in Scenography

391
Performance Practicum I
Practical experience in theatrical production.
393
Performance Practicum II
Further practical experience in theatrical production.
400
Advanced Acting I
Advanced practice of creative, technical and interpretive aspects of acting with emphasis on the integration of physical, vocal and textual components.
411
Introduction to Directing
Fundamental approaches and skills in directing covered through theory and practice.
413
Directing I
Extended practices in directing.
419
Scenography II
Set design and scenography for a variety of contemporary theatre forms and genres. Topics will include set, costume, lighting and projection for live performance.
423
Scenography III

440
Seminar in Drama III
Critical study of plays in Drama's season of plays suited to students in their third and fourth years; critical analysis and historical interpretation is integrated with a careful consideration of requirements for staging; plays generically or historically related may also be studied.
455
Advanced Topics in Canadian Theatre and Drama
Advanced studies in Canadian Drama. Areas of study may include historical and/or performance movements, critical schools, and the development of theatre companies and professional associations in Canada.
460
Performance Creation II
Advanced exploration of personal/group creative process; facilitation of a variety of improvisation and interactive theatre forms; solo/group performance creation. Theories and history of performance creation are integrated with practical experience.
471
Playwriting
Intermediate studies in writing for the theatre leading to the development of a one-act or full-length piece; workshop sessions for developing and rehearsing material.
481
Advanced Topics in Scenography
Possible topics include, but are not limited to: Scenic Art and Digital Techniques, Advanced Make-up and Prosthetics, Textile Manipulation, Projected Media for Live Performance, Advanced Scenic Painting, Advanced Lighting Design, Wearable Electronics and the Stage, Design for Devised Theatre, Professional Practice.
483
Advanced Topics in Theatre Studies
Advanced study in various topics related to theatre studies. Possible topics include, but are not limited to: sexuality as portrayed in the theatre, modernism in theatre studies, contemporary theories of performance.
491
Performance Practicum III
Further practical experience in theatrical production.
493
Performance Practicum IV
Further practical experience in theatrical production.
500
Advanced Acting II

511
Directing II
Advanced directorial processes from ideas through presentation and documentation.
513
Directing, Design and Dramaturgy
Advanced collaboration on respectively design-, director-, and dramaturgy-led processes of inquiry and creation.
517
Scenography IV
Advanced set, props, lighting, and costume design theory, process and technique for a variety of theatre forms and performance styles.
540
Seminar in Drama IV
Critical study at an advanced level of the dramatic metaphor as presented in Drama's season of plays; intensive focus on the historical period and theatrical genre of one or two of the season's plays especially.
560
Performance Creation III
Independent research, creation and facilitation of original solo or group performances.
564
Drama Education
Research into the nature and function of drama education across a variety of age levels and learning environments. Practical experience in structuring learning activities, developing classroom controls and facilitating creative process and performance may be included.
571
Directed Studies I
Independent research under the direction of a faculty member.
572
Directed Studies II
Independent research under the direction of a faculty member.
573
Dramaturgy
Theory and core principles of dramaturgy.
605
Methods in Theatre Research
Methods in research in the four areas of specialization in the MFA Theatre program.
607
Director, Designer, and Mise-en-scene
Advanced collaborative methods and techniques for directors, designers and dramaturges, leading to the creation of a mise-en-scene for selected plays of varying styles and genres.
610
Selected Problems in Directing

623
Seminar in Scene Design

625
Seminar in Costume Design

627
Seminar in Lighting Design

629
Seminar in Technical Direction

647
Studies in Modern Drama I
Studies in the literature, history, theory and criticism of drama, theatre and performance from the late nineteenth century to the mid-twentieth century.
649
Studies in Modern Drama II
Studies in the literature, history, theory and criticism of drama, theatre and performance from the mid-twentieth century to the present.
651
Directed Studies

660
Seminar and Practicum in Performance Creation

671
Selected Problems in Playwriting I

673
Selected Problems in Playwriting II

Earth Science
3
301
Human-Environment Interactions
Exploration of the interactions between humans and environment at different time scales and in different regions. Geographically distinct regions are selected to highlight how humans have adapted to climate change and hazardous natural events. Past adaptations will be examined in the modern context.
401
Methods in Earth Science
An introduction to field and laboratory methods used in earth surface processes research. Field excursions may involve travel and will provide the basis for laboratory exercises.
501
Research Project in Earth Science
An original research project that focuses on earth surface processes and may target local, regional, or global issues. Participants will be exposed to oral and written communication, field sampling techniques and strategies, laboratory techniques, strategies and limitations, and relevant statistical analysis and graphic communication.
East Asian Language Studies
1
501
Advanced Research in East Asian Languages Studies
A research-oriented seminar that will allow students to synthesize their training in East Asian languages and cultures and bring it to bear on a particular subject in Chinese and/or Japanese, or on the relation between East Asian languages and their respective cultures. Students will meet with the instructor individually and regularly in order to discuss their respective research projects.
East Asian Studies
2
201
Understanding Contemporary East Asia
An introductory exploration of the cultures of China, Japan, and Korea that outlines their shared characteristics as well as highlighting their differences. Subjects covered include physical environment, history, philosophy, social and political order, economy, and arts.
531
Issues and Methods in East Asian Studies
Contemporary social, philosophical, economic, political and/or international issues within East Asia and methodologies for analysis of the basis for interactions among East Asian countries will be presented in-depth.
Ecology
13
413
Field Course in Ecology
An examination of ecological principles and techniques through field exercises, including studies of terrestrial and aquatic populations, communities and ecosystems. The course is held at the Kananaskis Centre for Environmental Research in the two weeks immediately prior to the commencement of the Fall Term.
417
Aquatic Communities and Ecosystems
Community composition and dynamics at the various trophic levels of aquatic ecosystems. Temporal and spatial changes in community composition, physical and chemical conditions, and their effects on the ecosystem. There will be a full week-end field trip, normally during the first or second week of the term.
419
Terrestrial Communities and Ecosystems
Processes and patterns in above- and below-ground terrestrial communities. Ecosystem level processes in fluxes of carbon and nutrients. Methods for assessing biomass, productivity and biochemical pathways.
425
Quantitative Biology II
Quantitative analysis as applicable to ecological research. Methodologies and models will be presented and analyzed. Particular emphasis will be placed on experimental design, regression analysis, and the study of spatial dispersion.
429
Ecology of Individuals
Ecological and evolutionary perspectives on physiology and behaviour. This course focuses on the influences on resource acquisition, maintenance, growth, and reproduction and their implications for survival and fertility.
439
Ecology of Populations
A conceptual and practical treatment of population ecology including: population growth, demography, life histories, population dynamics, competition, predation and mutualism.
501
Ecological and Evolutionary Applications
A class project course in which students apply their understanding of ecological and evolutionary concepts and their analytical skills to investigate selected problems in detail. Project topics vary from year-to-year and will include fundamental and applied problems. Formal written and oral reports will be presented as a necessary component of the course.
507
Special Problems in Ecology
Independent research or reading project that may include seminars, lectures, term papers and training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods.
527
Ecology of Fishes
The ecology of fishes with an emphasis on freshwater systems. Fish will be used as models for examining ecological principles and theory at various levels of organization including physiological, behavioural, population and community ecology. Topics covered include: morphology, systematics, foraging, bioenergetics, life history strategies, population dynamics and the role of fish in aquatic food webs.
528
Independent Studies in Ecology
Original and independent thought, practical research and the completion of written and oral reports.
529
Molecular Ecology and Evolution
Molecular Ecology utilizes population genetics, phylogenetics, and genomics to address questions in ecology, evolution, behaviour and conservation. Topics will include principal and emerging molecular techniques for characterizing and analyzing genetic variation to test quantitative predictions from ecological and evolutionary theory.
530
Honours Research Project in Ecology
Research project under the direction of one or more faculty members in the Department of Biological Sciences. Formal written and oral reports must be presented on completion of this course. Open only to Honours Ecology students or Honours Biological Sciences students.
603
Advanced Behavioural Ecology
Current problems and recent research in areas of particular significance. Topics will vary from year-to-year.
Economics
98
201
Principles of Microeconomics
Principles of consumption, production, exchange: market and firm equilibrium under different competitive conditions. These principles are applied to various contemporary problems in the Canadian economy, such as the changing structure of agriculture, foreign ownership and control, and pollution.
203
Principles of Macroeconomics
National income determination, the monetary and banking system, and elementary fiscal and monetary policies. Contemporary problems of unemployment, inflation, economic growth, business cycles and the international economy.
209
Engineering Economics
The basic tools and methodology of engineering economic studies. Topics include investment decisions, theory of replacement, economies of scale, externalities, social decision making and government regulation. Examples are drawn from engineering projects.
301
Intermediate Economic Theory - Microeconomics I
Demand, production and costs in a market economy. Pricing in perfectly and imperfectly competitive markets.
303
Intermediate Economic Theory - Macroeconomics I
Introduction to the analysis of macroeconomic issues including the causes of recessions and unemployment, the determination of exchange rates, and the effects of government policies.
311
Computer Applications in Economics
Use of spreadsheets for economics applications, including project evaluation with financial-economic functions, oil and gas prospect evaluation, investment portfolio management with database functions, database retrieval, and various topics in micro- and macro-economics.
321
The Global Trading System
Introduction to the theory of international trade; provides a basis for examining Canadian trade policy, and regional and world trade institutions such as the WTO and NAFTA. Topics include: tariffs, non-tariff barriers and enhancements, countervail and anti-dumping action, multinational enterprises and international joint ventures.
323
Natural Gas Markets
Operation of the natural gas industry in North America. Economics of exploration, development, production, marketing and transportation of natural gas. Impact of government regulations and deregulation.
325
The North American Oil Industry
An introduction to the crude oil industry in North America, focusing on exploration, development, and production. Topics include Canadian and US oil policies, environmental policy, industry taxation, and royalty regimes.
327
Petroleum Economics
A non-technical introduction to the economics of petroleum production, crude oil markets, and refining economics. A focus on global crude oil and refined product markets.
329
Electricity Markets
Economic analysis of the deregulated electric power industry including the pricing of power, energy and capacity, power supply and demand, market structure, market architecture, and the design and testing of market rules.
337
Development Economics
An introduction to developing economies: the meaning, significance and purpose of economic development, major theories of economic development, economic problems of developing countries.
339
Canadian Economic History
The growth and development of the Canadian economy in relation to the endowment of natural resources, changing market conditions and technology, and Canadian public policy.
341
Money and Banking
Operation of financial markets and institutions: the principles of money creation, interest rate determination, and central banking.
345
Economic Analysis of Law
An introduction to the relationship between law and economics. Economic theory will be used to analyze property and tort law.
349
The Economics of Social Problems
Contribution that economic analysis can make to the understanding of selected current social issues such as poverty, aging, crime, drug abuse and discrimination.
353
Chinese Economy
Survey of the economic institutions and processes shaping the Chinese economy, including but not limited to fiscal and monetary policy, financial institutions and financial sector reforms, the restructuring of state-owned enterprises, and the provision of social welfare.
355
Canadian Public Finance
Examination of the institutions behind and economic rationale for Canadian government policy relating to public expenditures and taxation. Topics include the history and present structure of government spending and taxation, tax expenditures, the budgetary process, inter-jurisdictional issues, and program design.
357
Intermediate Economic Theory - Microeconomics II
Extensions of microeconomic topics such as factor markets, general equilibrium, and welfare economics.
359
Intermediate Economic Theory - Macroeconomics II
Extensions of macroeconomic topics such as theories of aggregate consumption and investment, interest rate theory, the demand for money, expectations in macro models and growth theory.
365
Regional Economics
The nature of economic regions. Choosing regions for development, regional income estimation and social accounting, inter-regional flow analysis, location theory, theory of regional growth and planning.
371
Economic Analysis of Transportation
Modal choice by passengers, location choice by firms, capital investment choice. Cost, demand, and market structure related to the determination of transportation rates. Cost/Benefit analysis of transportation projects. Analysis will be related to contemporary aspects of ocean shipping, air, rail, trucking, pipelines and urban transportation.
373
Game Theory and Strategic Thinking for the Social Sciences
An introduction to the principles of game theory utilizing a non-mathematical and intuitive approach. The principles of strategic thinking are illustrated by application and examples in economics and other social sciences. The objective is to develop the ability of students to reason strategically and to understand how game theory can be used to explain social interaction.
377
Economics and the Environment
An introduction to the analysis of environmental problems from an economic perspective. Issues such as air and water quality, biodiversity and endangered species will be addressed from local as well as global views.
379
The Economics of Health
Theories and evidence regarding demand for health and health care, consumer and physician behaviour, asymmetric information in health care markets, and economic evaluation of health care programs.
387
Introduction to Mathematical Economics I
Essential mathematical background for studying Economics: basic techniques of linear algebra and calculus, including unconstrained and constrained optimization, and their applications to resource allocation problems.
389
Introduction to Mathematical Economics II
Further essential mathematical background for studying Economics, including exponential and logarithmic functions, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, quadratic forms, integration, and basic methods of dynamic analysis, and their applications to resource allocation problems.
395
Use of Statistics in Economics
Lectures: The use of statistical principles in economics. Topics include: the gathering of economic data; basic data manipulation and hypothesis testing; and the statistical estimation of economic relationships. The two-variable linear regression model is introduced. Laboratory: Quantitative analysis using standard statistical software.
399
Selected Topics in Economics I
A decimalized course in which topics will vary from year-to-year. Consult the timetable or the Department for the topics available in a given year.
401
Public Sector Economics: Expenditures
Theory of government spending. Topics include the nature of public goods and externalities, the pricing of public services, causes of growth of public expenditures, expenditure incidence, social insurance, social decision procedures, and political and bureaucratic influences.
403
Public Sector Economics: Taxation
Theory of taxation. Topics include the rationale for and the incentive effects of taxation, efficiency and equity aspects of taxation, partial and general equilibrium tax incidence, open economy effects, choice of governing instruments, and tax reform.
405
Political Economy of Public Policy
Introduction to the economic foundations of political economy and economic models of public sector policy formation. Potential topics are the role of institutions in policy design, theories of bureaucracy, political business cycles, the formation and behaviour of interest groups, and the strategic use of government debt.
423
International Macroeconomics
Foreign exchange markets, and international macroeconomic connections with trade in assets as well as goods and services. Topics include: alternative exchange rate regimes; monetary and fiscal policy responses to problems of unemployment and inflation; balance of payments adjustment mechanisms; international debt; and Euro-dollar markets.
425
International Trade
The general equilibrium treatment of the gains from trade, comparative advantage and trade patterns provides a basis for examining topics such as: trade policy under imperfect competition, trade policy and the environment, trade policy and economic growth, and preferential trading arrangements.
427
Energy Economics and Policy
Microeconomic analysis of the allocation of energy resources with a focus on policy issues including the environment, OPEC, national security, price and entry regulation, market design, and the potential for new energy sources.
431
Labour Economics
Economic analysis of migration, labour force participation, education, fertility, human resources policy, and the measurement and treatment of unemployment.
453
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Theoretical basis for social cost-benefit analysis, appraisal techniques for investment projects and public policies, and selected applications.
465
Industrial Development of Alberta
Structure, growth and development of the provincial economy; evaluation of industrial projects and policy alternatives.
471
Industrial Organization
Behaviour of firms in imperfectly competitive markets. Topics include the theory of strategic competition; dynamic price competition and tacit collusion; product differentiation, product selection, and preemption; entry deterrence and capacity competition; information, reputation, and predation; the economics of research and development; international trade and imperfectly competitive markets.
473
Water Resource Economics and Policy
Selected economic issues in water resource use in Canada and other countries, including policies toward, and management of, water allocation, water quality, and the value of water for ecosystem services.
475
Economics of Natural Resources
Application of economic theory to the problems of natural resource pricing, allocation and conservation. Rent theory, location theory, intertemporal maximization. Natural resource policy formulation. Contemporary Canadian resource problems.
477
Regulatory Economics
An introduction to economic regulation, its rationale, form and effects with a focus on the economic theory of regulation and on the practice, structure, and evolution of Canadian regulatory institutions.
479
Experimental Economics
Introduces students to the use of and insights gained from experiments in economic research. As part of the course, students will be participating in a variety of in-class experiments.
481
Behavioural Economics
Major factors underlying economic behaviour including: various views of the role of rationality in economic analysis and in the economic decision making of individuals and institutions; determinants of individual preferences and decision making procedures; the experimental analysis of economic behaviour; inter-relations between the operation of the economic system and feelings of subjective well-being.
483
History of Economic Thought
Traces the evolution of economic ideas from the earliest times up to and including the contributions of the classical economists and Marx. Emphasis will be on understanding these contributions both in terms of their historical context and their relationship to present-day theories and controversies.
485
Economics of the Welfare State
The focus is on ideas and economic analysis relevant to understanding the economics of the welfare state, where issues of income redistribution and social insurance are central.
487
Environmental Economics
Applies microeconomic theory to the examination of market failures as the source of environmental problems, and to designing and evaluating environmental policies to correct them.
489
Economics of the Movie Business
Applies microeconomic theory to the motion-picture industry, focusing on how information and extreme uncertainty shape the structure of economic transactions. The historical and institutional illustrations are set in the context of Hollywood.
491
Managerial and Decision Economics
Systematic economic analysis in managerial decision-making. Application of practical ideas to business decisions, integrating global business issues and practices with conceptually rigorous economic analysis.
493
Empirical Energy Economics
Students will study and learn how to apply methods of data analysis that are particularly useful in the context of energy economics.
495
Econometrics I
Introduction to the techniques used in quantifying economic relationships. Econometric principles of estimation and hypothesis testing will be applied to the various economic models. The use of a standard econometric software package is emphasized.
497
Econometrics II
A more in-depth theoretical and empirical treatment of econometrics. Topics include: time series analysis, limited dependent variable estimation and simultaneous equation estimation.
499
Selected Topics in Economics II
A decimalized course in which topics will vary from year-to-year. Consult the timetable or the Department for the topics available in a given year.
527
World Oil Economics
Analysis of the world oil industry in the post-war period.
537
Economic Growth
This is an advanced course in Macroeconomics which explores why some countries are rich and others are poor.
541
Monetary Theory
A survey of recent work in monetary theory with primary emphasis on financial issues.
557
Topics in Economic Theory I
Topics in microeconomic theory such as welfare economics and general equilibrium theory.
559
Topics in Economic Theory II
Topics in macroeconomic theory such as consumption and growth.
571
Competition Policy
The law and economics of competition policy. An examination of the economics, jurisprudence and history of competition policy towards mergers, price fixing, vertical restraints, and monopolization, primarily in Canada and the United States.
599
Selected Topics in Economics III
A decimalized course in which topics will vary from year-to-year. Consult the timetable or the Department for the topics available in a given year.
605
Computational Optimization and Economic Applications
Explores the theory and numerical implementation of mathematical programming, covering basic classes of optimization problems — linear programming, non-linear programming and complementarity problems — as ways to operationalize models of individual choice and decentralized equilibrium behaviour from economics. Applications will vary.
609
Political Economy
Provides a selective overview of modern political economy.  Gives an introduction to the basic theoretical models, empirical methodologies, and substantive findings in political economy. Covers theoretical and empirical research and the links between the two. Also treats a number of selected topics on the research frontier.
611
Special Topics in Economics
Topics will vary from year-to-year. Consult the timetable or the Department for the topics available in a given year.
615
Econometrics

619
Empirical International Trade
Examines issues from the economic literature on international trade. Focuses on quantitative and empirical analysis. Specific topics include the factor content of trade, firm level and multinational behaviour, empirical testing of political economy determinants of protection, and assessing the environmental impact of trade agreements.
621
International Trade
Focuses on the microeconomic aspects of international economics with emphasis on general equilibrium models commonly employed in international economics. Specific topics covered include theories of international specialization and exchange, trade policy and economic welfare, international factor movement, trade and growth, under both perfect competition and imperfect competition, and selected problems of trade policy in the international trading system.
627
Energy Economics
Applies the tools of microeconomics, institutional economics, and econometrics to energy markets and policies. Focuses on empirical studies of the energy business including markets for natural gas, crude oil, gasoline, electricity and coal.
633
Labour Economics
Emphasizes empirical implementation of theoretical models through the use of data and econometrics. Topics include labor supply theory, search theory, wage determination theories, and numerical methods for the estimation of dynamic models.
635
Regulatory Economics
An in-depth study of regulatory economics, defined as price and entry regulation. Price and entry regulation occurs when the state restricts who can provide services and approves the terms of service. A considerable part of the course will address regulatory restructuring in network industries, with case studies on electricity reform, local telecommunications, and pipelines.
641
Financial Economics
A review of  the main themes of financial economics and an introduction of  a number of frontier ideas that have marked the recent evolution of the discipline. The main focus is on asset pricing and the application of financial econometrics to modelling and prediction of financial data.
649
Empirical Public Economics
Focuses on empirical research on the economics of the public sector, including material on taxation, public expenditures and social insurance. Gives a broad overview of this growing field and prepares for research in public economics.
651
Redistribution and Social Insurance
A focus on the economics of public expenditure programs designed to redistribute income or to provide social insurance against risks faced by households.
653
Public Revenue Analysis
A focus on the revenue side of public finance, primarily in the form of taxation. The equity and efficiency aspects of different taxes are considered, as is optimal tax design. Possible topics include the taxation of labour and capital, the impact taxation on savings and risk taking, and environmental and resource taxation.
655
Cost/Benefit Analysis
Theoretical and applied aspects of the use of cost-benefit techniques and applied welfare analysis in the evaluation of investment projects and public policies.
657
Microeconomic Theory
Introduction to advanced microeconomic theory. Topics include consumer theory, theory of the firm, general equilibrium, uncertainty, game theory, and informational economics.
659
Macroeconomic Theory
Introduction to the analysis of macroeconomics at an advanced level. Provides an overview of theories addressing the major questions of macroeconomic phenomena. Some coverage of applied topics, such as economic growth and government policy.
661
Behavioural Economics

667
Industrial Organization
A focus on market power: its acquisition, maintenance, and exercise. Both theory and application, with an emphasis on how industrial organization does, and should, inform competition policy and antitrust law, will be examined.
669
Empirical Industrial Organization
Firm behaviour in oligopolistic markets, as well as consumer and firm behaviour in environments with asymmetric information. Strong emphasis on combining economic models with econometric techniques to answer economic questions. Models of demand and supply, discrete static and dynamic games, production function estimation, single agent dynamic models and matching models.
675
Natural Resource Economics
Examines economic models of the structure and nature of natural resource industries and their interaction with the rest of the economy. Includes non-renewable and renewable resources and applies methods from capital theory, growth theory, public economics, and industrial organization to the study of natural resources.
677
Environmental Economics
Environmental economics describes the ways in which people interact with their natural environment and the policies that best achieve society's goals in this context. Topics vary from year-to-year and may include benefit-cost analysis, non-market valuation, choice of policy instruments, environmental taxation, trade growth and the environment, global warming and international environmental treaties.
679
Health Economics
An overview of topics in health economics. An introduction to economic principles and techniques used in analyzing and planning health policy, in particular the delivery of health services, and for understanding the health behaviour of individuals.
691
Research Methods I
Survey of research methods in economics. For course-based MA students.
693
Research Methods II
Survey of research methods in economics. For course-based MA students.
695
Research Methods III
Master's research project. Identify an interesting and feasible research question, carry out an extensive literature review of the problem area, develop an economic/econometric model to address the problem, identify and collect appropriate data for empirical research.
697
Research Methods IV
Master's research project. Continuing from Research Methods III, the economic/econometric model is fully developed with specific attention to identification issues and testable hypotheses. Appropriate econometric analyses, validation and testing are carried out, leading to a research paper reporting the problem, the model and the results.
705
Advanced Econometrics I
Devoted to rigorous treatment of asymptotic theory as it applies to econometric practice. Provides a detailed treatment of the theory and practice of classical estimation procedures, including linear regression and instrumental variables, Maximum Likelihood, the Generalized Method of Moments, as well as an extension to simulation-based methods. The theory of hypothesis testing is also covered.
707
Advanced Microeconomic Theory I
Introduction to advanced microeconomic theory. Topics include consumer theory, theory of the firm, and general equilibrium.
709
Advanced Macroeconomic Theory I
Introduction to the basic structure of the dynamic general equilibrium framework that forms the backbone of most modern macroeconomics research. Selected topics include growth, business cycles, and monetary and labor economics.
711
Independent Study

715
Advanced Econometrics II
Focuses on the problem of causality and identification of treatment effects in empirical work in Economics. Topics include but are not limited to randomized trials, causality, instrumental variables, difference in differences, regression discontinuity designs. Students are introduced to empirical applications of these different approaches.
717
Advanced Topics in Econometrics
Studies cutting edge econometric tools used to evaluate the impacts of policies, extrapolate their effects to new environments, and predict the effects of policies that have never been tried. Methods from both the structural and treatment effect paradigms of policy evaluation will be considered.
723
Trade, Growth and the Environment I
Covers relevant theoretical work on the environmental consequences of trade liberalization and economic growth, and the relationship between resource use and globalization, focusing on newly published research.  Participants are expected to present and discuss research. The specific choice of topics will be made based on research interests of the class.
725
Trade, Growth and the Environment II
Covers relevant empirical work on the environmental consequences of trade liberalization and economic growth, and the relationship between resource use and globalization, focusing on newly published research.  Participants are expected to present and discuss research. The specific choice of topics will be made based on research interests of the class.
757
Advanced Microeconomic Theory II

759
Advanced Macroeconomic Theory II

791
PhD Research Workshop
Survey of research methods in economics.
793
PhD Research Workshop II
Survey of research methods in economics.
Education
32
101
English Academic Success
Students will relate their own life story and experiences to the wider human condition by reading a variety of literary texts and through writing in a variety of literary forms. Assignments will present opportunities for students to develop a critical understanding of literature in a personal context.
201
Introduction to Educational Studies
An introduction to the breadth and complexity of educational studies. Unique among academic domains, educational studies not only arises in the intersections of many other fields – including psychology, sociology, anthropology, and a range of disciplinary domains – it must also be responsive to a rapidly changing world.
205
Reading Educational Research
Focusing on students’ reading skills, this course continues to develop awareness of academic language genres, formal versus informal language use, and the development of critical thinking and logical argumentation skills. Continuing development of study skills and approaches that foster long-term academic success are integrated into course materials.
207
How Children Learn to Read
Examines how young children learn to read through their world of daily experiences.
209
Supporting Children’s Reading
Students will explore strategies for promoting reading development through integrated experiential learning opportunities.
211
Academic Writing in Education
Focusing on students’ writing skills, this course develops awareness of academic language genres, formal versus informal language use, as well as the skills required for researching and referencing academic work in written texts. The development of study skills and approaches that foster long-term academic success are integrated with academic language skills development.
213
How Children Learn to Write
Examines how young children learn to write through their world of daily experiences.
215
Supporting Children’s Writing
Students will explore strategies for promoting writing development through integrated experiential learning opportunities.
305
Inside Mathematics
An exploration of the usually-tacit elements of mathematical concepts and processes, the course focuses on strategies for unpacking concepts and for sustained engagement in inquiry.
307
Integrating Arts Education
A preparation for artists and educators to design effective learning in, about, and through the arts. Discipline-specific knowledge and technique in and about art, dance, drama, and music will be acquired in a studio environment, and applied through an interdisciplinary, collaborative lab. Learner outcomes include interdisciplinary planning skills, aesthetic awareness, critical and analysis thinking, and inter-arts competencies.
309
Early Childhood Development
An examination of the science of early childhood and early brain development that accounts for the physical, cognitive, emotional, and social development of young children from birth to age eight, and a consideration of the implications with respect to children’s healthy development and effective educational practices in the early school years.
311
Language and Literacy, Learning in the Classroom
An introduction to perspectives on the way children and adolescents become “literate”, examining language and literacy from a development perspective and children’s literature from a genre perspective.
420
Issues in Learning and Teaching
Presents an overview of the central issues related to the nature of learning and teaching for those preparing for the teaching profession. Themes include: the nature of learning; current realities in society; patterns of growth and development; and the changing dynamics of the teaching profession.
427
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)

430
Pragmatics of Learning and Teaching
Examines the concomitant requirements within which teachers operate. The major components that will be addressed include the ways in which teachers work within the parameters of prescribed curricula and assessment requirements, follow system and school policies, participate in team teaching and school culture, and reflect one’s work, values and goals.
435
Literacy, Language and Culture
The orienting principle is that every teacher is a teacher of reading. Includes a focus on the necessity for teachers across all disciplines and grades to attend to dimensions of language development, linguistic diversity, and literacy learning in their classrooms.
440
Field Experience I
Students will participate in Educational Rounds in school settings within and outside of their areas of specializations under the guidance of their university field instructor and the partner school leadership team. They will explore the organization of learning in the school and the perspective of the learner and the teacher.
445
Individual Learning: Theories and Applications
Covers contemporary theories regarding the nature of individual learning. Students will examine the ways educators guide and support learning, design effective learning experiences, and understand underpinning factors related to individual learning. The application of these theories will be examined using examples that demonstrate and exemplify individual learning.
450
Diversity in Learning
Includes key topics in inclusive education from an interdisciplinary perspective. The development and conception of diversity of learning will be examined from historical and contemporary perspectives. Building upon this foundation, students will consider the multiple and contested ways in which diversity of learning has been conceived, implemented and evaluated in schools.
456
Assessment
An array of topics related to assessment to help students develop a professional level of knowledge, skills and attitudes in relation to the philosophy, theory and pedagogical application of assessment practices for K-12 education.
460
Specialization I

465
Field Experience II
This block field experience will have major focus on the complexities of individual learning. Prospective teachers will have the opportunity to follow individual students through various classrooms within their assigned schools under the guidance of their university field instructors and partner school leadership teams.
520
Interdisciplinary Learning
Students will be introduced to new knowledge building experiences that deepen their understanding of the interdisciplinary nature of learning and practice in schools and societies. Particular attention will address how teachers integrate ideas to connect learning and knowledge between subject specializations in attending to complex forms of learning and understanding, and how teachers understand their agency and leadership roles in concert with the responsibility that accompanies it.
525
Ethics and Law in Education
An introduction to the historical genesis and institutional structure of Alberta's system of education; an understanding of its legal underpinnings; an opportunity for dialogue; on current major issues in education; and discussion involving ethical decision-making surrounding educational issues.
530
Indigenous Education
Students will be introduced to the national and international experiences and advances of Indigenous peoples as related to education. Particular attention will be given to understanding the histories and diversity of the First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples of Canada and the concomitant implications that this has for education policy and practice.
535
Specialization II

540
Field Experience III
This team-oriented block practicum is founded upon the principles of collaborative learning. It includes structures and supports that promote positive interdependence, individual accountability, equal participation, and simultaneous interaction.
546
Design-based Thinking

551
Comprehensive School Health and Wellness

556
Professional Learning

560
Field Experience IV
In this extended block field experience, students will have an opportunity to work one-on-one to lead a class with a mentor teacher. They will be under the guidance of their university advisors and partner school leadership teams.
570
Field Experience for Certification
An extended block field experience to lead a class with a mentor teacher. Students will be supervised by their University field instructors and partner teachers.
Education Bridge to Teaching
6
601
Contemporary Education
Examination of recent philosophical, historical and curricular constructions of contemporary Canadian and Albertan education.
602
Teaching in Alberta I
Exploration of the core beliefs, values, and practices in contemporary educational environments, and how students can bridge from their own understanding to what is aimed for in Alberta learning environments.
603
Practicum Support Seminar I
Examination of how to integrate previous teaching expertise, new learning, and practicum experiences in Alberta.
604
Learning with Technology
Examination of ways to create authentic and meaningful learning experiences through the implementation of web and computer technologies in classroom settings.
605
Teaching in Alberta II
Further examination of teaching, learning, learners and learning environments in Alberta classrooms.
606
Practicum Support Seminar II
Examination of the integration and extension of learning and teaching for practicum students to engage in a second practicum experience.
Educational Psychology
122
600
Theories, Conceptualizations, and Interventions in Counselling Psychology I
Theoretical foundations and practice frameworks for the major schools of counselling psychology.
601
Theories, Conceptualizations, and Interventions in Counselling Psychology II
A continuation of theoretical foundations and practice frameworks for the major schools of counselling psychology.
602
Counselling Theories and Professional Practice
Engages students in a critical evaluation of a range of contemporary counselling theories and helps them begin to develop a description of their own emerging theory.
603
Research Methods in School Psychology
Advanced study of research methods for use in applied psychology and education.
604
Professional Ethics in Applied Psychology
Ethical, legal and professional knowledge to inform practice in educational, counselling and mental health contexts.
605
Psychological Measurement and Statistics
Advanced study of measurement and quantitative research methods for use in applied psychology and education.
606
Practice Evaluation in School Psychology
Introduction to basic concepts related to the assessment of the quality and effectiveness of educational programs and environments.
607
Fundamentals of Measurement
Survey course on educational research methodologies which addresses issues of research design, methods, and interpretation of research findings, including a focus on test construction and psychometrics as they pertain to the development of assessment tools.
608
Introduction to Statistical Analyses
An introductory course on descriptive and inferential statistics designed to give students with minimal statistical background sufficient competence to conduct basic statistical procedures. Topics will include: displaying data; measures of central tendency, variability, and correlation; regression analysis and prediction; probability; parameter estimation; and analysis of variance. Emphasis will be on understanding basic concepts, using software to conduct analyses, and interpretation of results.
609
Research Design in Statistics II
Research design and statistics, including methods for research in  psychology and related laboratory instruction.
610
Research Methodology in Counselling
Survey course on research methodologies in counselling, which addresses issues of research design, methods and interpretation of research findings.
611
Qualitative Research Methodologies
Advanced study of qualitative research methods for use in applied psychology and education.
612
Research Methods in School Psychology
Advanced study of research methods for use in applied psychology and education.
614
Ethics in Professional Psychology
Ethical, legal, and professional knowledge to inform practice in educational, counselling, and mental health contexts.
615
Theoretical and Clinical Foundations of Assessment
In-depth review of theoretical and clinical foundations of psycho-educational assessment. Focus is on processes of assessment, properties of tests, use and interpretation of tests and clinical diagnosis.
616
Assessment Theory and Practices
Combines a theoretical and practical focus to develop a framework from which to approach the assessment of client change in a variety of contexts.
617
Psychological Assessment of Adults
Focuses on the knowledge and skills necessary to select, administer, score and interpret formal psychological tests and other assessment instruments commonly used with adults within counselling contexts.
618
Multivariate Design and Analysis
Research design and statistics in psychology, with special reference to large sample techniques.
619
Counselling Girls and Women
Sex role development; stereotyping and social roles; counselling theories; counselling approaches.
620
Psychological Assessment of Children and Youth
Focuses on the knowledge and skills necessary to select, administer, score, and interpret formal psychological tests and other assessment instruments commonly used with children and youth within counselling psychology contexts.
621
Creating a Working Alliance
Theory and practice in developing skills contributing to working alliance and problem clarification. Ethical, legal and professional issues are the context for the application of generic counselling skills in laboratory experiences.
622
Developing and Sustaining a Working Alliance with Clients
Focuses on the understanding and acquisition of skills that are essential for the development of working alliances in counselling contexts. Introduces a theoretical framework for the application of counselling skills in addition to providing the opportunity for skill practice.
623
Theory in Counselling
History and systems involved in counselling psychology and client change.
624
Cultural and Social Justice Issues in Professional Practice
A critical examination of cultural and equity issues related to the lives of clients and the psychological professionals serving them.
625
Cultural Influences on Professional Practice
An examination of cultural influences on theory and practice in applied psychology.
626
Group Interventions and Processes
Examines theoretical, research, and experiential knowledge helpful in facilitating diverse educational and psychological groups.
627
Group Processes in Applied Psychology
Theory of group practice in applied psychology, with experiential laboratory.
628
Theories and Applications of Child and Youth Therapy
Review of the theoretical foundations and associated clinical strategies of psychosocial intervention with children and youth by drawing on common approaches to contemporary practice.
629
Theory and Applications: Selected Topics

630
Foundations of Career Counselling
Review and application of theoretical and research literatures relevant to counselling clients with career concerns.
631
Theories of Career Development
Study of career development theory and related research; implications for the applied field.
632
Career Development and Services for Organizational Settings
Designed to combine theoretical and practical concerns regarding applications of career development concepts to human resources contexts in organizations. Concepts will be relevant to counselling and human resources development professionals.
633
Career Counselling
Laboratory and field experiences in career counselling.
634
Multicultural Career Development and Counselling
Increasing cultural diversity requires career development practitioners to examine the ways that their services are designed and delivered. Designed to enable students to deliver culturally responsive career counselling services to diverse populations.
635
Advanced History, Theory, and Practice in Psychology
Course examines the history of psychological concepts in Western culture, major theoretical systems and research approaches, and the foundational assumptions of contemporary perspectives in psychology.
636
Systemic Approaches to Community Change
Provides students with a theoretical and practical basis to work as effective community change agents in a broad range of sectors. An examination of comprehensive guidance in schools provides a foundation for exploring key concepts pertinent to developing and implementing comprehensive services in a variety of contexts, and in the process, gaining a better understanding of communities, and building their strengths and capacities.
637
Relationship Counselling
Study of theories and intervention strategies of the most common approaches to contemporary practice in couples and family therapy.
638
Counselling Interventions for Client Change
Combines a theoretical and practical focus to develop a framework from which to plan and implement client change interventions in a variety of contexts.
639
Counselling Interventions
Theory and practice in planning and implementing client change interventions; the application of counselling interventions in laboratory experiences.
640
Practicum in Counselling Psychology II
Supervised counselling experience and related seminars.
641
Development, Learning and Cognition - Child and Adolescent
The interactions of development, learning and cognition in childhood and adolescence.
642
Counselling Practicum I
Provides an opportunity for professional development and supervised practice in a general counselling setting. Students will be involved in direct work with clients under the supervision of a qualified professional.
643
Development, Learning and Cognition - Adult
The interactions of development, learning and cognition in childhood and adulthood.
644
Counselling Practicum II
Provides an opportunity for professional development and supervised practice in a specialized counselling context. Students will be involved in direct work with clients under the supervision of a qualified professional. The practicum allows students to actively explore issues encountered in working with a specialized client population or area of practice.
645
Indigenous Approaches to Therapy
Focuses on integrating Indigenous ways of knowing, being, and doing into therapeutic practice, including case conceptualization, the therapeutic alliance, treatment planning, interventions, and ethics. Addresses Indigenous approaches to therapy with individuals, families, and groups.
646
Processes of Learning
Addresses the essential features of major theories of learning and presents current research in each area of learning. Students will discover how the principles of learning relate to their own learning and behaviour, and how the principles can be used to understand the behaviour of others and enhance counselling practice.
647
Practicum in Counselling Psychology I
Supervised counselling psychology field experience. Increases conceptual understanding of counselling psychology and develops counselling and consulting skills.
648
Lifespan Human Development
Introduces a comprehensive view of human development across the lifespan, drawing on the major theoretical positions. Developmental themes are discussed in terms of their application to typical and atypical human development in children, adolescents and adults.
650
Family and Social Bases of Behaviour
Examines theoretical perspectives and contemporary research on socialization processes in childhood and adolescence, with particular emphasis on family and peer interpersonal relations. Students will explore the connections between family and the education system including parent involvement in schools.
651
Disorders of Learning and Behaviour
Focuses on childhood and adolescent disorders through an examination of theories, diagnostic and associated features and disorders, prevalence, developmental course, cultural and gender context, and familial patterns.
652
Academic and Language Assessment
Course provides a broad understanding of the standards that guide assessment practices through an examination of assessment of academic areas and language skills.
653
Professional Practice of School Psychology
A focus on the preparation, roles, functions, and employment of school psychologists as well as the regulation, evaluation, and accountability of school psychologists.
654
Neurobiological and Developmental Bases of Learning and Behaviour
Examines the field of cognitive neuroscience from an assessment framework. It explores the evolving understanding of neurobehavioural disorders and new testing techniques and practices now available to assess neuropsychological characteristics in both clinical and research settings.
655
Advanced Child Development
Explores the theory and research supporting recent advances in select areas of child development. Topics include: parent/peer relations; personality, self and self-concept; language and thought; emotion and motivation; and pro-social, antisocial, and moral development.
656
Practicum in Academic and Language Assessment and Intervention
This 200-hour practicum provides opportunities to develop competencies in academic and language assessment and interventions within an approved setting.
657
Cognitive and Neuropsychological Assessment
Focuses on the theory and practice of intellectual/cognitive, memory, and neuropsychological assessment primarily through the use of individually administered standardized tests.
658
Interventions to Promote Cognitive, Academic, and Neuropsychological Well-Being
Focuses on evidence-based interventions aimed at promoting cognitive, academic, and neuropsychological development in children and youth.
659
Academic Assessment and Intervention
Academic and language assessment and intervention primarily through the use of individually administered standardized tests and evidence-based interventions aimed at promoting academic and language development in children and youth.
660
Social, Emotional, and Behavioural Assessment
Grounded in bioecological systems perspective and developmental and resiliency frameworks, course focuses on the comprehensive assessment of children and youth referred for social, emotional, and behavioural concerns.
661
Psychological Foundations of Student Exceptionality
Major trends, developments, theoretical foundations, and current practices and challenges relative to the education of students with diverse learning needs.
662
School Psychology Practicum I
Provides supervised experience to develop competencies aligned with the practice of school psychology, including consultation, assessment, and intervention. Adherence to all provincial and national ethical and professional guidelines is expected.
663
School Psychology Practicum II
Provides supervised experience to further develop and refine school psychologist competencies. Administration of evidenced–based intervention strategies will be also required. Adherence to all provincial and national ethical and professional guidelines is expected.
664
Psychological Approaches to Health
Focuses on how human psychology and human health intersect and is organized according to core principles and skills that guide the practice of health psychology. Will orient students to contemporary theories and models of health, illness, and health promotion, and their relevance in a variety of settings.
665
Cognitive Assessment and Intervention
The theory and practice of intellectual/cognitive, and memory assessment primarily through the use of individually administered standardized tests and evidence-based interventions aimed at promoting cognitive, academic, and neuropsychological development in children and youth.
667
Assessment of Students with Exceptional Learning Needs
Theory and practice in school-based academic and social-emotional assessment techniques and strategies for use with students with diverse learning needs. Laboratory and field experiences.
668
Theory and Practice of Clinical Supervision
Intended for students to learn the process of clinical supervision and as a result become better consumers of supervision, more effective supervisors, and more able to evaluate their current and future development and involvement in supervisory roles.
669
Social-Emotional Assessment and Intervention
Focuses on the theory and practice of social, emotional, and behavioural assessment and on evidence-based interventions to enhance the mental health and behavioural well-being of children and youth.
670
Final Project Portfolio
Students complete a culminating independent project in their area of specialization to satisfy the degree requirements.
671
Practicum in School-based Interventions for Children and Youth with Exceptional Learning Needs: I
Practicum in educational interventions for children and adolescents with special learning needs. Focus on general assessment, analysis, intervention, and strategies in applied settings.
672
Counselling Exceptional Children
Intended to help students enhance their awareness and understanding of major trends, developments, theoretical foundations, and current practices and challenges in counselling and providing consultation for special needs children and adolescents.
673
Practicum in School-based Interventions for Children and Youth with Exceptional Learning Needs: II
Advanced practicum in educational interventions for children and adolescents with special learning needs. Focus on specialized assessment, analysis, interventions, and strategies in applied settings.
674
Interventions to Promote Socio-emotional and Behavioural Well-Being
Focus on strategies to enhance the socio-emotional and behavioural well-being of children and youth who exhibit significant emotional and behavioural needs in school and community settings.
675
Practicum in Cognitive and Neuropsychological Assessment and Intervention
This 200-hour practicum provides opportunities to develop competencies in cognitive and neuropsychological assessment and interventions within an approved setting.
676
Practicum in Social, Emotional, and Behavioural Assessment
A supervised practicum in social, emotional, and behavioural assessment. Students will undertake comprehensive social, emotional, and behavioural assessment with children and youth presenting with various developmental disorders. Students will undertake this practicum experience within the Werklund School of Education's Integrated Educational Services office (ISE).
677
Play Therapy Theory and Process
The theoretical foundations and basic orientation necessary to understand and use play as therapy are outlined, along with the developmental underpinnings of play in children and the basic principles upon which child-centred play therapy is built.
678
Art Therapy History
Art therapy is examined from a broad perspective, from its beginnings as a treatment for mentally or emotionally disturbed people, to its development as a distinct profession in North America and Europe. The works of key authors are covered, along with their theoretical approaches and current trends in the field. Students will learn how the foundations of art therapy are incorporated by many disciplines, with applications in many settings.
679
Fundamentals of Solution-Oriented Therapy
Provides a working knowledge of the theory and practice of solution-oriented therapy and related models.
680
Counselling Graduate Practicum: Selected Topics
Graduate Practicum: Selected Topics.
681
Theories and Skills of Counselling
An introduction to the major theories of counselling as well as counselling micro-skills and interviewing skills.
682
Special Topics: Counselling
Graduate Seminar: Special Topics.
683
Consultation in School Psychology
Examines the purpose and skills of consultation, evaluation issues, and strategies in consultation as well as the role of school psychologists relative to multidisciplinary school teams, school-based problems solving, and student development and learning.
684
Advanced Seminar in the Domains of School Psychology Leadership and Function in the Schools
Provides an advanced study of the domains and functions of school and applied child psychologists. Constituting the final course within the MEd program, students are required to demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of and competency in the ten domains identified by the National Association of School Psychologists as central to the school psychology profession. For each of the ten domains, students will complete a case study requiring the integration of theory, research, and skills.
685
Child and Adolescent Counselling
Introduces the theory and practice of counselling in school-based settings and fosters student development of rudimentary counselling and psychotherapy skills for school-based service delivery.
686
Counselling Graduate Seminar: Selected Topics
Graduate Seminar: Selected Topics.
687
Developmental Psychopathology
An examination of the history of psychopathology and abnormal psychology, and the DSM-V. An empirical and theoretical scope will be used to approach childhood disorders including issues with classification, etiology, and developmental course.
688
Cognitive and Affective Bases of Behaviour
A survey of cognitive development in the first two decades of life. Topics may include biological bases of cognition, perception, memory, motivation, emotion, learning, language and motor.
689
Cognitive Assessment
A focus on the history, theory and practice of cognitive assessment. This course also focuses on report writing and multicultural assessment within the context of cognitive evaluation.
690
School-based Intervention and Consultation
An exploration of school systems, evidence-based interventions, and theories of consultation.
691
Graduate Seminar: Selected Topics
Applied course in program planning, design, and evaluation for counselling contexts.
692
Graduate Seminar: Selected Topics

693
Graduate Seminar: Selected Topics

694
Graduate Practicum: Selected Topics

695
Graduate Practicum: Selected Topics
Supervised counselling field experience.
696
Social, Emotional, and Behavioural Assessment and Intervention
A focus on the assessment and intervention of children and youth who exhibit significant social, emotional, and behavioural needs in school and community settings.
697
Practicum in Academic and Cognitive Assessment
With a focus on academic and cognitive functioning, this practicum provides supervised experience to develop competencies aligned with the practice of school psychology including consultation, assessment, and intervention.
698
Pre-Master's Internship in School and Applied Child Psychology
Within this 1200 hour full-time internship, Masters level interns will have opportunities to demonstrate under supervision their ability to apply their knowledge to develop specific skills needed for effective school psychological service delivery and integrate competencies that address various domains of professional preparation and practice in school psychology.
701
Advanced Research Design, Psychometrics and Statistics in Applied Psychology
Provides intensive exposure to sophisticated quantitative techniques relevant to research design, psychometrics, and statistics such as structural equation modelling (SEM), item-response theory (IRT), and hierarchical linear modelling (HLM).
702
Advanced Theories in Measurement
This advanced seminar course focuses on a variety of topics and issues related to measurement in the social, educational, and behavioural sciences. As we progress through the course, we will cover topics critical to measurement; including principles of scale development (e.g., item writing, scaling), and validity theory (e.g., construct representation and validation). This course is strongly recommended for anyone planning to pursue applied, clinical, or research studies/careers involving the use of tests and/or measures.
703
Advanced Seminar in Applied Psychology
Doctoral seminar on issues in applied psychology. Dissertation development.
704
Advanced Research Seminar in Counselling Psychology
Seminar in counselling psychology research.
705
Advanced Seminar in Special Education I
Advanced study of theoretical, empirical, and practical issues affecting individuals with exceptional learning needs.
708
Advanced Theories of Measurement
Focuses on a variety of topics and issues related to test and scale construction in psychology and education.
709
Advanced Seminar in Applied Learning and Developmental Psychology I
Advanced study of theory and practice in human development and learning.
710
Latent Factor Modelling
Advanced seminar on latent factor modelling.
711
Program Development and Evaluation
Applied course in program planning, design, and evaluation for counselling contexts.
731
Advanced Clinical Supervision in Applied Psychology
Provides students with formal training in clinical supervision with the intent of raising an awareness of supervision models, as well as a conceptual framework and vocabulary for thinking through their supervision practice.
732
Advanced Seminar in School and Applied Child Psychology
Seminar series that links theory and research with practice in the school psychology domains of professional competence.
741
Advanced Professional Skills and Issues
Focuses on providing knowledge and developing skills in the areas of consultation, supervision, and program development and evaluation across the lifespan.
742
Advanced Practicum in Counselling
Advanced practicum in counselling psychology, and related seminars.
743
Advanced Practicum in Psychological Assessment
Advanced applied training in psychological assessment, including assessment of human personhood and standardized assessment.  Students will participate in field experience under the supervision of registered psychologists.
760
Evidenced-Based Consultation for Intervention
Develops advanced problem-solving consultation skills as an indirect service delivery model. Through role play and consultative work in clinic and/or school settings, students gain hands-on experience in problem identification, problem analysis, plan development/implementation, and plan evaluation/recycling.
761
Advanced Doctoral Practicum in Clinical Assessment and Supervision
Provides opportunities to apply and develop clinical knowledge and skill as well as best-practice approaches to supervision.
762
Advanced Neuropsychological Assessment and Intervention
Builds advanced understanding of neuropsychological approaches to assessment and intervention and the use of the cognitive hypothesis testing model to formulate and test hypotheses.
763
School- and Clinical-based Interventions
Introduces behavioural, social, emotional, and counselling interventions with a particular focus on their application to school and clinical settings for use with children and adolescents.
764
Advanced Research Statistics
Provides instruction in advanced statistical methods. Topics include, but are not limited to, multilevel/growth curve modelling, structural equation modelling, and topics related to the measurement of growth and change and the use of advanced statistical software.
766
School-Based Practicum
This advanced practicum will provide students with specialized assessment, intervention, analysis, and strategies in school settings under the supervision of registered school psychologists.
788
Pre-Doctoral Internship in Counselling Psychology
The internship is a full-time commitment over the course of one calendar year or half-time over the course of two consecutive calendar years. The full-time and half-time experiences each provide, at a minimum, 1,600 hours of supervised experience in an approved clinical setting. Practical application of theories and interventions pertaining to individual and group, couple, or family counselling as well as assessment, consultation, and supervision. Experience in addressing a variety of professional issues.
792
Advanced Seminar: Selected Topics

793
Graduate Seminar: Selected Topics

794
Advanced Practicum: Selected Topics

795
Advanced Practicum: Selected Topics
Supervised counselling and school and applied child psychology field experience intended to enhance the professional practice skills of students.
798
Pre-Doctoral Internship in School and Applied Child Psychology
The internship is a full-time commitment over the course of one calendar year or half-time over the course of two consecutive calendar years. The full-time and half-time experiences each provide, at a minimum, 1,600 hours of supervised experience involving the theory and practice of evaluations, consultation, interventions, research, and related activities within an approved school, clinic, or other human service agency.
Educational Research
94
600
Research Methodology in Education
Examines the foundations of different research methodologies.
602
Program and Practice Evaluation
Introduction to evaluation as a discipline, as a profession, as a process, and as a product in a wide range of educational and social contexts.
603
Research Methods
Introduction to various approaches to research in education.
604
Collaboratory of Practice
Focus is on disciplined inquiry on a research problem and/or action research in an educational context. Research is carried out along with a systematic analysis, synthesis of collected information and findings are reported.
606
Writing Educational Research
Introduction to forms and structures of academic writing and knowledge mobilization. Focus is on the exploration of various approaches to sharing research findings according to discipline standards.
608
Research Methods in Education
Examines methods, issues of design, and ethical considerations in educational research.
610
Case Study Research in Education
Exploration of case study as an approach, methodology, and design related to research in education.
612
Participatory Methodology in Education
An examination of participatory approaches to inquiry that is oriented toward meaningful, impactful, and sustainable action in educational contexts.
613
Change and Innovation in Education
Examines both traditional and contemporary research literature relevant to change and innovation in educational settings.
614
Action Research in Education
Introduction to the intellectual and moral traditions, ideas, and approaches to action research. Knowledge and skills related to the design, implementation, critical reflection, and evaluation of action research are developed.
616
Design-Based Research Methods in Education
Introduction to the emergence and application of design-based research in education. Explores complexity (systems) theory in addition to key principles and practices.
617
Organizational Theory and Analysis in Education
Human organization as the setting for the delivery of educational services.
618
Research Design and Statistics I
Introduction to descriptive and inferential univariate statistics, sampling distributions, hypothesis testing, and a variety of statistical techniques used in experimental and correlational methods of research in education and related social sciences.
619
Special Topics in Educational Leadership
Attends to the contemporary and timely debates that shape educational leadership at local, national and international levels.  Topics are reflective of the pressing and current issues in educational leadership.
620
Introduction to Interpretive Inquiry
Introduction to interpretive approaches to qualitative inquiry such as phenomenology, hermeneutics, narrative inquiry, and interpretive forms of case study.
621
Assessment of Classroom Learning
Examines both traditional and emerging assessment techniques, including Performance Assessment and Learning Portfolios, for examining students' learning outcomes.
623
Topics in Educational Technology
Topics and issues in educational technology.
624
Introduction to Phenomenology and Hermeneutics
Advanced study of critical interpretive research methods, featuring phenomenology and hermeneutics as approaches to understanding and exploring engagement within educational research.
625
Teacher Evaluation
Examines the techniques for assessing teacher performance.
626
Ethnographic Research Approaches in Education
Introduction to ethnographic approaches to research in educational contexts. Explore historical, conceptual, theoretical, practical and ideological issues.
628
Indigenous Methodologies in Education
Introduction to key theoretical concepts, issues and methodologies based on Indigenous ways of knowing, being, and doing within the context of educational research.
629
Special Topics in Assessment/Evaluation
Examination of assessment and evaluation theories and practices.
630
Indigenous Research Methods in Education
An exploration of Indigenous research methods and related issues of design, and ethical considerations in conducting research.
631
Special Topics in Adult Learning
Examines topics in adult learning.
635
Topics in Adult Learning
Explores a variety of current topics and discourses pertaining to adult education and adult learning.
641
Research on the Reading Process
Examination of various theories about the teaching and learning of reading in the elementary school.
649
Special Topics in English Language Education
Explores a variety of theoretical perspectives and discourses in English Language Education.
651
Philosophy of Education
Philosophical topics in the context of education.
653
Sociology of Education
Sociological topics in the context of education.
655
Comparative Education
Topics in comparative education.
657
Culture and Gender Studies
Culture and gender topics in the context of education.
659
History of Education
Historical topics in the context of education.
664
Language and Literacy: Theory and Research
Introduction to the principles of language learning from cognitive, sociocultural, and critical perspectives.
667
Second Language Reading and Writing
Research and practice in second language reading and writing.
668
Theory and Research in Languages and Diversity
Topics include the acquisition, use, learning and teaching of language(s) and literacy in a variety of settings.
669
Aspects of Second Language and Culture
Introduction to research and issues on various aspects of second language and culture.
671
Conceptualizing Educational Technology
Seminar to familiarize students with the terrain of educational technology.
673
Instructional Design
Integration of theory and practice associated with the selection and sequencing of content across the instructional spectrum and the matching of instructional strategies to characteristics of learners and content.
675
Principles of Instructional Development
Topics include the examination of a variety of instructional development models, the systems approach to developing instruction, front-end analysis and needs assessment, risk analysis, constraint analysis, resource analysis, task analysis, and evaluation.
677
Distributed Learning
Examination of distributed teaching and learning processes in educational systems with attention to computer mediated teaching and communication and integrated instructional design methodologies.
678
Special Topics in Learning Sciences
Examination of current topics and issues in learning sciences and related areas.
679
Special Topics in Educational Technology
Examination of current topics and issues in educational technology and related areas.
681
Studying Curriculum
Curriculum research, theory, and practice with particular reference to curriculum aims, content, organization and change.
682
Conceptualizing Interpretive Inquiry
In-depth study of the various approaches to conducting interpretive studies in curriculum, teaching, and learning.
683
Curriculum Development, Implementation and Assessment
Making sense of what happens when curriculum policy becomes reality and affects students, teachers, parents and politicians.
684
Contemporary Themes in Critical Pedagogy and Social Justice
Explores the relationship between structural inequalities, education and curriculum theory.
685
Interpretive Curriculum Discourses
The field of interpretive work in curriculum theory.
687
Interpretive Study of Curriculum I
Introduction to the study of curriculum, theory and practice with an emphasis on lived experience at the Master’s level.
688
Interpretive Study of Curriculum II
In-depth study of the historical movements and philosophical contexts of contemporary curriculum theorizing and practice at the Master’s level.
689
Aspects of School Curriculum
Introductory systematic study of research and issues focused on various areas of the school curriculum.
692
Collaboratory of Practice
An examination of real world problems and practices through reviewing the theoretical and research literature linking these to an analytical framework.
693
Interpretive Study of Curriculum
Introduction to the various forms of educational inquiry.
696
Special Topics in Education
Topics designed to prepare foreign-prepared teachers to meet Alberta Education teacher certification requirements.
697
Special Topics

698
Special Topics

700
Seminar for First-Year Doctoral Students
An examination of assumptions underpinning a range of educational traditions and their relationships to educational research. An interdisciplinary forum to investigate, debate, and develop knowledge of the major historical, epistemological, theoretical and pedagogical trends in formal education within and beyond the modern era.
701
Advanced Research Methodologies
Advanced study in the conduct of research.
703
Directed Study
Individual doctoral study in a selected area.
705
Doctoral Seminar in Educational Leadership
Provides doctoral students with a contemporary Canadian focus on significant issues in educational leadership.
707
Collaboratory of Practice I
Critically review and apply the tenets of a literature review to inform proposed doctoral research.
708
Collaboratory of Practice II
Critically review and apply the tenets of various research methodologies and design to inform proposed doctoral research.
709
Dissertation Seminar I
Ongoing engagement in doctoral research activities, post-candidacy, as appropriate to the research timelines, research design and methodology, and requirements for writing and defending the dissertation.
710
Dissertation Seminar II
Ongoing engagement in doctoral research activities, post-candidacy, as appropriate to the research timelines, research design and methodology, and requirements for writing and defending the dissertation.
713
Participatory Research Methods
Advanced study of educational research methodologies broadly defined as ‘participatory’. An exploration of impactful, sustainable research approaches intended to support the involvement of interested and affected agents and agencies.
714
Action Research Methods
Advanced study of the traditions, ideas, and variety of approaches to action research. An examination of the design, implementation, critical reflection, and evaluation of action research.
716
Design-Based Research
Advanced study of the emergence and application of design-based research in education. An exploration of complexity (systems) theory, key principles and practices in design based research: analysis, exploration, design, implementation, evaluation, reflection, and applications within education.
718
Research Design and Statistics II
Advanced study of quantitative approaches to data collection and statistical analysis in experimental and correlational methods of research in education and related social sciences.
719
Advanced Special Topics in Educational Leadership
Provides doctoral students with advanced exploration of diverse, contemporary topics in k-12 and post-secondary learning organizations.
720
Advanced Approaches to Interpretive Inquiry
Advanced study of an array of interpretive approaches to qualitative inquiry such as phenomenology, hermeneutics, narrative inquiry, and interpretive forms of case study.
724
Advanced Approaches to Phenomenology and Hermeneutics
Advanced study of critical interpretive research methods, featuring phenomenology and hermeneutics as approaches to understanding and exploring engagement within educational research.
726
Ethnographic Research Approaches in Education
Advanced study and consideration of the historical, conceptual, theoretical, practical and ideological issues in ethnographic approaches to research in education.
733
Advanced Workplace and Adult Learning
Advanced exploration of diverse topics in adult learning.
735
Advanced Topics in Adult Learning
Provides a deeper understanding of foundational topics and discourses that inform the field of adult learning, scholarship, and practice.
741
Advanced Seminar in Theory and Research in Literacy Education
A critical examination of theories, models, and research that underpin literacy education.
762
Theory and Research in Leading Language and Literacy
An examination of leadership in language and literacy, assessment and evaluation, language and identity, multiliteracies, digital literacy, and Indigenous literacies.
764
Advanced Language and Literacy: Theory and Research
An examination of the principles of language learning from cognitive, sociocultural, and critical perspectives.
768
Theory and Research in Languages and Diversity
Topics include current issues in language and literacy, assessment and evaluation, language and identity, multiliteracies, digital literacy, and Indigenous literacies.
770
Historical and Philosophical Foundations in Learning Sciences
An examination of theories, designs, and practices in learning sciences.
771
Doctoral Seminar in Educational Technology
An examination of the historical and philosophical foundations of the field that informs the critical analysis of current and emerging research in educational technology.
772
Advanced Seminar in Design
An introduction to various perspectives on designing formal and informal learning environments in technological and non-technological settings, including exploration of research approaches and methodologies.
773
Advanced Seminar in Design and Development of Learning
An exploration of advances and trends in learning and instructional design and development theory and evaluation.
774
Leadership, Learning, and Systemic Change
An exploration of systemic and organizational change and innovation theories in relation to leading teaching and learning in agile and changing educational systems and networks.
775
Advanced Seminar in Technology Enabled Learning Environments
An evaluation of contemporary distributed, blended and collaborative learning environments through design, development and inclusive learning perspectives.
777
Advanced Seminar in Leading Systemic Change
An examination of systemic change theory, network/systems theory, diffusion of innovations and change theories, complex adaptive leadership, and transformed leadership.
778
Advanced Learning Sciences
Advanced concepts in learning sciences.
779
Advanced Educational Technology
Advanced concepts in educational technology.
780
Interpretive Study of Curriculum III
In-depth study of the various approaches to conducting interpretive studies in curriculum, teaching and learning at the doctoral level.
781
Conceptualizing Curriculum Research
Analysis of different approaches to curriculum research, especially assumptions, meaning frameworks, and views of the theory/practice relationship.
783
Advanced Topics in Curriculum and Learning
Advanced study of topics in curriculum and learning at the doctoral level.
784
Doctoral Seminar on Perspectives of Learning
Study of particular aspects of Learning Theory at the doctoral level.
785
Advanced Study of Interpretive Curriculum Discourses
An advanced study of interpretive curriculum discourses focusing on cutting-edge examples of such work.
786
Doctoral Seminar in Interpretive Curriculum Discourses
Study of particular aspects of Interpretive Curriculum Discourses at the doctoral level.
787
Contemporary Themes in Critical Pedagogy and Social Justice
Explores the relationship between structural inequalities, education and curriculum theory.
798
Advanced Special Topics
Provides doctoral students with advanced exploration and study of emerging topics in education.
Electrical Engineering
83
101
Computing Tools I
Introduction to computing tools in Electrical engineering. Basic data input/output and arithmetic operations; matrix variables; interpreted programming scripts and data management; plotting; functions. Applications in numerical methods and analysis.
102
Computing Tools II
Methods for solving electrical engineering problems using computing tools for the solution of: multivariable linear and non-linear equations; polynomial curve-fitting; single and multi-variable integration; function optimization; differential equations. Graphical data representation.
300
Electrical and Computer Engineering Professional Skills
Introduction to the electrical and computer engineering profession, fundamentals of electrical and computer engineering design, testing, and product development; critical thinking and problem solving skills development; electrical engineering standards, regulatory issues, intellectual property protection, research methods, project management, identifying market needs and commercialization considerations. Case studies and projects may be drawn from a range of electrical and computer engineering areas.
327
Signals and Transforms
Continuous-time systems. Impulse response and convolution. Fourier series and Fourier transform. Basics of discrete time signals. Sampling theory. Discrete convolution. Difference equations and the Z-transform. Discrete-time Fourier representations.
343
Circuits II
Laplace transform methods for circuit analysis. Transfer functions and series and parallel resonance. Basic filter theory and Bode diagrams. Natural, step, and transient responses of RL, RC, and RLC circuits. Two-port circuits. Two-port circuit parameters: admittance, impedance and hybrid parameters.
353
Digital Circuits
Number systems and simple codes. Combinational logic: Boolean algebra, truth tables, minterms, maxterms, Karnaugh maps; gates, buffers, multiplexers and decoders; combinational circuit timing. Sequential circuits: latches and D flip flops; timing considerations; analysis and synthesis techniques; Mealy and Moore machine models; counters and registers. Introduction to memory arrays.
361
Electronic Devices and Materials
Properties of atoms in materials, classical free electron model, conduction electrons in materials, and band electrons. Properties of semiconductors and insulators; Doping and PN Junctions, Diodes, rectifier and clamping circuits, BJTs, MOSFETs.
400
Electrical Engineering Design and Technical Communications
Fundamentals of electrical and computer engineering design, testing, and product development; critical thinking and problem solving skills development; regulatory issues, project management, teamwork and leadership. Effective and efficient writing will be emphasized. Case studies and projects may be drawn from a range of electrical and computer engineering areas.
419
Probability and Random Variables
Expressing engineering data and systems in terms of probability, introduction to probability theory, discrete and continuous random variables, functions of random variables, goodness-of-fit testing hypothesis testing and stochastic processes. Applications chosen from electrical engineering.
441
Control Systems I
Component modelling and block diagram representation of feedback control systems. Mathematical modelling of dynamic systems; state-space representation and frequency domain representation of dynamic systems. Transient response analysis and steady-state error analysis. Root-locus analysis and design. Frequency response analysis with Bode and Nyquist stability criterion. Compensation design techniques. Introduction to multi sensor state feedback compensator design. Overview of digital control systems and industrial controllers.
453
Digital Systems Design
Design, implementation and testing of a digital system. Mask programmable and field programmable technology. Logic design for integrated systems. Design for testability. Real versus ideal logic design. CAD tools for digital systems design: simulation, synthesis and fabrication.
469
Analog Electronic Circuits
BJT biasing, load-line analysis, BJT as amplifier and switch, small-signal model, single-stage and two-stage small-signal BJT amplifiers, current sources and current steering, differential pair and multistage BJT amplifiers, BJT power amplifiers, operational amplifier circuits.
471
Introduction to Communications Systems and Networks
Introduction to communications systems and networks. Analog communications concepts including filtering and analog modulation. Sampling and digital communications concepts including binary baseband/passband modulation, matched filtering and detection. Telecommunications and data network fundamentals including network protocol architectures, design and performance.
475
Electromagnetic Fields and Applications
Electrostatic and magnetostatic fields and applications; applications of vector calculus for electromagnetics; introduction to Maxwell's equations for time-varying fields; plane wave propagation.
476
Electromagnetic Waves and Applications
Plane wave propagation, reflection, and refraction; transmission line theory and applications; introduction to scattering parameters, matching networks, Smith charts; propagation in waveguides; cavities and resonant modes; advanced topics.
487
Electrical Engineering Energy Systems
Fundamental of energy resources and electric power generation, transmission and distribution; steady-state models for generators, load, transformers, and transmission lines; three phase systems, per unit representation; transmission line parameters; power flow analysis.
500
Computer, Electrical, and Software Engineering Team Design
Preliminary and detailed engineering design and implementation of an engineering system that applies engineering knowledge to solving a real-life problem. The emphasis is on the design process as it is associated with electrical, computer and software engineering, design methodology, general design principles for engineers, teamwork and project management.
503
Computer Vision
Introduction to the fundamentals of image processing and computer vision. Image/video acquisition and raw data matrix manipulation; image processing operations and compression methods; object detection, isolation, and classification; 3D tracking and ego-motion with projective transformations.
514
Introduction to Nanotechnology

519
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering
Current topics in electrical engineering.
525
Machine Learning for Engineers
Neural networks: neuron models and network architectures, perceptrons, Widrow-Hoff learning and backpropagation algorithm, associative memory, Hebbian learning, pseudo-inverse learning. Fuzzy systems: basic operations and properties of fuzzy sets; fuzzy rule generation and defuzzification of fuzzy logic; fuzzy neural networks. Applications such as pattern recognition, character recognition, stock market prediction, and control.
529
Wireless Communications Systems
Overview of terrestrial wireless systems including system architecture and industry standards; propagation characteristics of wireless channels; modems for wireless communications; cells and cellular traffic; cellular system planning and engineering; fading mitigation techniques in wireless systems; multiple access techniques for wireless systems.
541
Control Systems II
Introduction to sampled-data control systems, discretization of analog systems, discrete-time signals and systems, causality, time-invariance, z-transforms, stability, asymptotic tracking, state-space models, controllability and observability, pole assignment, deadbeat control, state observers, observer-based control design, optimal control.
559
Analog Filter Design
This class deals with the theory and design of active filters, for audio-frequency applications, using op amps. It consists, basically, of two phases. Phase 1 deals with the realization of a given transfer function using cascade of first and/or second-order RC-op amps circuits. In phase II, the transfer functions of filters are studied in combination with frequency-response approximations such as Butterworth, Chebyshev, Inverse-Chebyshev, Cauer (or Elliptic) and Bessel-Thompson.
562
Photovoltaic Systems Engineering
Prospect of photovoltaics in Canada; solar radiation; fundamentals of solar cell; photovoltaic system design; grid connected photovoltaic systems; mechanical and environmental considerations.
563
Biomedical Signal Analysis
Introduction to the electrocardiogram, electroencephalogram, electromyogram, and other diagnostic signals. Computer techniques for processing and analysis of biomedical signals. Pattern classification and decision techniques for computer-aided diagnosis. Case studies from current applications and research.
565
Digital Integrated Electronics
Semiconductor devices, modelling of CMOS switching, CMOS logic families, performance and comparison of logic families, interconnect, semiconductor memories, design and fabrication issues of digital IC's.
567
CMOS Analog Circuit Design
Introduction to CMOS very large-scale integrated (VLSI) circuit design. Review of MOS transistor theory and operation. Introduction to CMOS circuits. CMOS processing, VLSI design methods and tools. CMOS subsystem and system design for linear integrated circuits.
569
Electronic Systems and Applications

571
Digital Communications
Fundamentals of digital communication systems. Digital coding of analog waveforms; digital pulse modulation, pulse code modulation, delta modulation. Intersymbol interference; baseband transmission, correlative coding. Probability theory. Optimal demodulation of data transmission; matched filtering; bit error rate.
573
Computer Networks
Overview of the network protocol stack. Reliable communications over a link; medium access; packet routing; the transport and application layers. Data and network security. Internet and telecommunications packet network architectures. Mathematical network analysis and network performance software tools.
574
Microwave Engineering
Modelling and analysis of lumped and distributed RF networks, analysis and design of passive structures and impedance matching networks, S parameters, linear modelling of transistors. Power, noise and distortion calculations for communication transceivers, analysis and design of wireless radio link and satellite communication link. Theory, analysis and design of small signal amplifiers, low noise and balanced amplifiers. Prototyping using printed circuit board technology, introduction to Computer Aided Design (CAD) tools and Computer Aided Testing Equipment.
575
Radio-frequency and Microwave Passive Circuits
Study and design of radio-frequency and microwave passive circuits such as filters, couplers, splitters, combiners, isolators, circulators; advanced transmission lines; antenna fundamentals; network analysis; advanced topics.
582
Modelling and Control of Electric Machines and Drives
Principles of electromechanical energy conversion. Rotating Machines (DC, Synchronous and Induction machines). Synchronous Generator voltage and power control, motor drive systems.
584
Electrical Power Systems in Commercial and Institutional Buildings
Electrical engineering design and practice applied to the building industry; Power Distribution Components, Types of power distribution systems, Uninterruptible, Emergency and Standby power systems, Bonding and Grounding, Ground Fault Protection, Light and optics, Measurement of light, lighting engineering, and quality of visual environments is discussed. Overview of basic requirements of the National and Alberta Building Code, and the Canadian Electrical Code that most impact design including rules for life safety systems and installation procedures and requirement.
585
Introduction to Power Electronics
Commutation. Diode rectifiers. Fully controlled 3-phase rectifiers. Choppers, inverters, ac controllers. Single-phase switch mode converters: dc-to-dc, ac-to-dc, dc-to-ac. Circuit and state-space averaging techniques. Switching devices and magnetics.
586
Power System Protection
Power System Protection philosophy, Short circuit calculation, Protective relaying fundamentals and design principles, Over-current relay co-ordination, Relay input sources, System Grounding, generator protection, Transformer Protection, Transmission line protection.
587
Power Systems Analysis
Advanced power flow studies including decoupled, fast decoupled and DC power flow analysis, distribution factors and contingency analysis, transmission system loading and performance, transient stability, voltage stability, load frequency control, voltage control of generators, economics of power generation.
591
Individual Engineering Design Project I
This project involves individual work on an assigned Computer, Electrical or Software Engineering design project under the supervision of a faculty member. The project will normally involve following an established design process. Engineering Communications, including written reports, logbooks and oral presentations.
592
Undergraduate Research Thesis I
A directed studies research project in an area of interest, directed by a project advisor/faculty member. Includes an independent student component covering the scientific process, ethics, review of literature, and writing scientific proposals and manuscripts. Projects may involve experimental, analytical or computer modelling studies.
593
Digital Filters

594
Undergraduate Research Thesis II

597
Power Systems Operation and Markets
Power system operation and economic load dispatch, concept of marginal cost, Kuhn-Tucker's conditions of optimum, unit commitment, hydrothermal co-ordination, power flow analysis, optimal power flow, probabilistic production simulation, power pools and electricity markets, market design, auction models, power system reliability, primary and secondary frequency control and AGC, steady-state and transient stability, power sector financing and investment planning.
599
Individual Engineering Design Project II

601
Advanced Power System Analysis
Energy transfer in power systems; real and reactive power flows; VAR compensation. Power system control, interconnected operation. Power system stability, techniques of numerical integration. Load representation, power quality. Computational paradigms for typical power system problems. Computer simulation of representative power system problems.
602
Virtual Environments and Applications
Introduction to virtual reality (VR) technologies; Characterization of virtual environments; hardware and software; user interfaces; 3D interaction; research trends. Applications: medicine, manufacturing, oil and gas reservoirs, the arts, and education.
603
Rotating Machines
General theory of rotating machines providing a unified approach to the analysis of machine performance. General equations of induced voltage and torque. Transient performance of machines.
604
System Design of Wireless Transceivers
Linear and nonlinear system analysis. Radio architectures – super-heterodyne, low intermediate frequency, direct conversion, sub-sampling; receiver system analysis and design; transmitter system analysis and design. Applications of transceiver system design to satellite and wireless communications.
606
Optical Instrumentation
Review of ray and wave optics. Free-space and fiber optic components. Linear, non-linear, and super-resolution microscopy. Light measurement and characterization. Digital imaging. Solid state light sources. Spectroscopy.
609
Special Topics
Designed to provide graduate students, especially at the PhD level, with the opportunity of pursuing advanced studies in particular areas under the direction of a faculty member.
610
Biometric Technologies and Systems
Biometric systems, sensors and devices. Integration of biometric-based hardware and software. Biometric applications in healthcare and security access.
613
Nonlinear Microwave Engineering
Theory, design and optimization of RF power amplification systems for wireless and satellite communication applications. A detailed treatment of linear and non-linear characterization and modelling of amplifiers/transmitters from device to system level perspective. Theory of operation as well as design techniques of linear amplifiers (class A, AB, B, C), switching mode amplifiers (class E, D and F) and balanced amplifiers are presented. Linearization and power efficiency enhancements techniques of power amplifiers/transmitters are also covered.
615
Non-linear Control
Non-linear systems; phase portraits, equilibrium points, and existence of solutions. Lyapunov stability definitions and theorems. Non-linear control design; feedback linearization, sliding modes, adaptive control, backstepping, and approximate-adaptive control. Frequency domain stability analysis using describing functions.
617
RF Integrated Circuit Design
Introduction to complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) wireless communication circuits; radio frequency integrated circuit building blocks; computer-aided design.
619
Special Problems
Designed to provide graduate students, especially at the PhD level, with the opportunity of pursuing advanced studies in particular areas under the direction of a faculty member.
623
Biomedical Systems and Applications

625
Estimation Theory
Fundamentals of estimation theory as applied to general statistical signal processing applications such as communication systems, image processing, target and position tracking, and machine learning. Estimator fundamentals including probability density functions, Cramer Rao bounds, Fisher information, linear and nonlinear regression, sufficient statistics, maximum likelihood estimation, minimum mean square error, least squares, Bayesian estimators and concepts. Statistical tracking filters such as Kalman filter and particle filter.
627
Antennas
Foundations of theory and practice of modern antennas. Topics covered will include: theoretical background, antenna parameters, simple radiators, antenna array theory, wire antennas, broadband antennas, microstrip antennas, aperture radiators, base station antennas, antennas for mobile communications, antenna measurements.
629
Advanced Logic Design of Electronic and Nanoelectronic Devices
Two-level and multi-level logic synthesis; flexibility in logic design; multiple-valued logic for advanced technology; multi-level minimization; Binary Decision Diagrams, Word-level Decision Diagrams, sequential and combinational equivalence checking; technology mapping; technology-based transformations; logic synthesis for low power, optimizations of synchronous and asynchronous circuits, logical and physical design from a flow perspective; challenges of design of nanoelectronic devices.
631
System Identification and Parameter Estimation
Parametric models of linear time-invariant systems. System and noise models. Estimation of model parameters. Structure and order selection. Model validation. Convergence and sensitivity analysis. Experiment design. MIMO systems. Subspace methods. Introduction to non-linear and/or time-varying systems.
633
Wireless Networks
Wireless networks architectures and protocols. Resource management. Mobility management. Interference management. Modelling and analysis of wireless networks. Optimization of wireless networks.
635
Cryptography and Number Theory with Applications
The topic of the course is to provide the students with vital information about the use of number theory in designing and implementing various public key cryptographic schemes.  We will stress on the efficacy of the algorithms used and their application in areas outside cryptography and coding theory.
637
Arithmetic Techniques with DSP Applications
The course is aimed at the use of specific computer arithmetic techniques for efficient design of DSP algorithms. We will provide comprehensive information form the theory of computer arithmetic. We will show how the performance of different algorithms can be optimized by using efficient arithmetic techniques. Many examples will be provided.
641
Optimization for Engineers
Introduction to optimization techniques for solving engineering problems. Modelling engineering problems as optimization problems. Recognizing and solving convex sets, functions and optimization problems. Numerical linear algebra including; matrix structure, algorithm complexity, LU factorization. Unconstrained optimization methodology and engineering applications. Constrained optimization techniques and engineering applications. Special topics in optimization such as multi-objective optimization and geometric programming.
645
Data Mining and Machine Learning
Types of data mining: classification, clustering, association, prediction. Processes: data preparation, model building. Techniques: decision tree, neural network, evolutionary computing, Bayesian network. Applications: multi-media, text and web mining.
647
Analog Integrated Circuit Design
Review of static and dynamic models of field effect transistors. Basics of analog integrated circuit design. Computer-aided modelling. Fabrication processes and their influence on analog design. Operational voltage amplifier and transconductance amplifier design techniques. Case studies of complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) designs.
649
Random Variables and Stochastic Processes
Probability; continuous and discrete random variables; functions of random variables; stochastic processes; stationarity and ergodicity; correlation and power spectrum; Markov chains and processes.
651
Resource Management for Wireless Networks
Qualitative and mathematical formulation of the resource management problem in wireless networks; elements of radio resource management: power and Walsh code allocation and control. Call admission control, traffic load control, packet scheduling; radio resource management algorithms: fixed resource allocation, handover resource management, transmitter power management, dynamic resource allocation, and packet scheduling algorithms; quality-of-service (QoS) and resource management; joint radio resource management problem across heterogeneous wireless networks; applications and case studies: resource management in advanced wireless networks; open research challenges in resource management for wireless networks.
653
Theory and Practice Advanced DSP Processor Architecture
Architecture and capabilities of SISD, SIMD and VLIW processors; Developing high speed algorithms: code timing, reliability, background DMA activity, maintainability; Developing a personal software process appropriate for embedded systems.
659
Active-RC and Switched-Capacitor Filter Design
The filter design problem; operational amplifier characteristics; cascade methods of RC-active filter design; filter design with the active biquad; active filter design based on a lossless ladder prototype. Switched-capacitor (SC) integrators; design of cascade, ladder, and multiple feedback SC filters; non-ideal effects in SC filters; scaling of SC filters; topics in fabrication of SC filters.
661
Grid-Connected Inverters for Alternative Energy Systems
Analysis and design of grid-connected inverters fed by an alternative energy source. Switch mode converters, inverter topologies, harmonics, drive electronics, control methodologies, implementation techniques, course project.
663
Numerical Electromagnetic Field Computation
Solution techniques for electromagnetic fields: finite difference, finite elements/volumes, boundary elements, finite difference time domain, and moment methods. Practical aspects concerning computer implementation: accuracy, speed, memory, and solvers.
667
Intelligent Control
Application of machine learning algorithms in control systems: neural networks, fuzzy logic, the cerebellar model arithmetic computer, genetic algorithms; stability of learning algorithms in closed-loop non-linear control applications.
671
Adaptive Signal Processing
Fundamentals: Performance objectives, optimal filtering and estimation, the Wiener solution, orthogonality principle. Adaptation algorithms: MSE performance surface, gradient search methods, the Widrow-Hoff LMS algorithm, convergence speed and misadjustment. Advanced techniques: recursive least-squares algorithms, gradient and least-squares multiple filter, frequency domain algorithms, adaptive pole-zero filters. Applications: system identification, channel equalization, echo cancellation, linear prediction, noise cancellation, speech.
675
Digital Communications
Physical layer digital communications. Linear modulation and demodulation using signal space concepts. Optimal and sub-optimal detection of symbols and sequences. Pulse shaping and spectral analysis. Wireless propagation and system design. Error correction using channel codes. Advanced techniques for high speed communications.
683
Algorithms for VLSI Physical Design Automation
Aspects of physical design including: VLSI design cycle, fabrication processes for VLSI devices, basic data structures and algorithms, partitioning, floor planning, placement and routing.
685
Software Defined Radio Systems
Advanced design aspects related to the design of Software Defined Radio (SDR) systems applicable to wireless and satellite communication systems. System level modelling and baseband design aspects of SDR systems. Transmitter and receiver architectures appropriate for SDR transceivers. Multi-band transmitters, sub-sampling receivers and six-port based receivers. Design strategies and calibration techniques for SDR systems.
687
Switch Mode Power Converters
Design and analysis of dc-to-dc and ac-to-ac single-phase power converters. Device characteristics. Dc-to-dc topologies, dc-to-ac topologies and ac-to-ac topologies. Linearized models. Classical feedback control; introduction to state-space analysis methods. Input harmonic analysis, output harmonic analysis, and techniques to obtain unity input power factory.
691
Integrated Micro and Nanotechnology Sensory Systems
Integrated circuits for sensing. The physical process of sensing photons and ions. The circuitry of signal amplification. Considerations for integrated circuit implementation. Solid state sensors and development in CMOS technology. Analog to Digital conversion in sensory arrays. Technology scaling and impact. Low voltage and implications regarding signal processing. Other types of sensors such as pH sensing. MEMS technology and applications. Integrated Light sources. System examples.
693
Restructured Electricity Markets
Basics of power systems economics, vertically integrated power monopolies, models of competition, market design and auction mechanisms, players in restructured electricity markets, generation scheduling in restructured electricity markets, perspective of large consumers, transmission operation in competitive power markets, transmission rights, the need for ancillary services in electricity markets, procurement and pricing of ancillary services, transmission and generation expansion in competitive markets.
695
Applied Mathematics for Electrical Engineers
Understanding of vector spaces and function spaces; eigenvalues and eigenvectors in both the linear algebraic and differential equation sense; special functions in mathematics; advanced methods for solutions of differential equations.
697
Digital Image Processing
Image formation and visual perceptual processing. Digital image representation. Two dimensional Fourier transform analysis. Image enhancement and restoration. Selected topics from: image reconstruction from projections; image segmentation and analysis; image coding for data compression and transmission; introduction to image understanding and computer vision. Case studies from current applications and research.
698
Graduate Project
Individual project in the student's area of specialization under the guidance of the student's supervisor.
Energy and Environment, Engineering
9
355
Introduction to Energy and the Environment
History of energy technologies, energetics of natural systems and agriculture, formation, extraction, and transformations of fossil fuels, renewables such as biomass, solar and wind; and the electricity system, environmental impacts of energy systems, technical options for transforming energy systems to reduce environmental impacts.
501
Pollution Prevention and Control for Energy Industry
An overview of environmental laws and regulations. Environmental standards for air quality, water and land. Regulatory approval process for new energy projects. Base-Line Study and Environmental Impact Assessment. Environmental review of new energy projects. Pollution prevention methodology and techniques. Separation and recycle streams. Process modification, integration, analysis and control. Risk assessment.
503
Life Cycle Assessment
Concepts of life cycle analysis. Applications to energy utilization, environmental consequences, sustainable development, environmental process analysis, and optimization. Inventory, impact and improvement analyses of energy systems. LCA Model development and utilization. Human health and safety considerations.
505
Effluent Treatment Processes for Energy Industry
Application of fundamental engineering concepts to develop process design specifications for various unit operations and separation processes used for the treatment of gaseous (air), aqueous (wastewater) and solid effluents from mining, exploration, production, transportation and utilization of carbon-based energy sources.
507
Introduction to Sustainable Development
Motivations for development of a sustainable industrial economy. Relationship among economic systems, growth and sustainable alternatives. International dimensions. Roles and responsibilities of stakeholders, including government, industry, and society. Tools for assessing sustainability. Sustainability challenges in industrial economies. Scope for sustainable innovations in the energy, manufacturing, and transportation sectors. Case studies of sustainable development.
519
Special Topics in Energy and Environment
Current advanced topics in Energy and Environment.
573
Engineering Aspects of Sustainable Communities
Ecological footprint, life cycle assessment, sustainable construction, energy efficiency in buildings, intelligent and sustainable transportation, control of water/air pollution from mobile and stationary sources, energy from waste.
575
Alternative Energy Systems
An overview of alternative energy systems including hydroelectric, wind, solar (thermal, concentrating, and photovoltaic), distributed generation using gas turbines. Energy system performance quantified using thermodynamic, fluid mechanic, and heat transfer analysis.
577
Electrical Transmission System Planning and Operation
Electricity markets, carbon markets, optimal operation of electricity systems, environmental impacts of transmission networks, regulatory issues.
Energy and Environmental Systems
5
601
Introduction to Energy and Environmental Systems

603
Project Course
Projects are applied interdisciplinary problem-solving courses in which students work as leaders or as members of project teams. Most course time is devoted to project management and presentations from students. The project course gives students experience working on weakly structured, real-world problems that require teamwork and contributions from diverse disciplines. They are co-managed by students and faculty advisors and should be responsive to an external "client" or expert panel. Problem areas are abstracted from local, provincial and national situations and involve the interaction of energy systems, the environment and public policy. Oral and written presentations concerning the results of project studies are required
606
Graduate Seminar
The graduate research seminar fosters the development of presentation and communication skills as well as engagement in critical analysis and debate. Course time is primarily research presentations by faculty, research staff and students. All students must present their work.
607
Tools for Systems Analysis
This course provides an introduction to analytical methods and software tools that are most frequently used for research in energy and environmental systems. Analytical methods include risk, uncertainty and decision analysis; an introduction to engineering economics; and an introduction to tools for environmental modelling. Software tools include Excel, and extensions such as Crystalball, general purpose systems such as Matlab and Mathematica; and GIS tools for non-specialists.
619
Special Topics
Students will be provided with the opportunity to focus on advanced studies in specialized topics pertaining to energy system engineering, law, public policy or economics, or a combination of these issues.
Energy Engineering
13
200
Engineering Design and Innovation
An interdisciplinary course involving the application of engineering principles and analysis to design and evaluate integrity and quality of engineering components and systems through a sequence of team-based design projects.
240
Introductory Dynamics for Energy Engineering
Calculus with applications to dynamics. Kinematics of particles undergoing rectilinear and curvilinear motion. Analysis of the kinetics of particles by direct use of Newton’s laws of motion, work and energy methods, and impulse and momentum methods.
260
Statics for Energy Engineering
Engineering Statics topics: force vectors; equilibrium of a particle in two and three dimensions; force system resultants; equilibrium of a rigid body in two and three dimensions; trusses; frames and machines. Vector and linear algebra methods and applications to static engineering mechanics.
300
Engineering Design and Energy Policy
Introduction to the mechanical, petroleum, and energy engineering profession, fundamentals of energy engineering design, testing, and product development; problem solving skills development; oil and gas standards, intellectual property protection, project management; regulatory issues; public policy. Case studies and projects may be drawn from a range of energy engineering areas.
340
Dynamics for Energy Engineering I
Systems of particles. Kinematics of rigid bodies. Rotation and translation. Torque and angular momentum. Moment of inertia. Two-dimensional dynamics of rigid bodies. Applications of mathematics to dynamics including first-order ordinary differential equations, integrating factor, separable and exact equations, second-order ordinary differential equations, characteristic equation and variation of parameters method, and series solutions of ordinary differential equations.
350
Computing Tools for Energy Engineers
The application of computer tools to solve practical Energy Engineering problems; fundamentals of engineering computing including algorithm development, selection of appropriate tools, documentation of solutions, and verification and interpretation of results; applications using engineering analysis and spreadsheet tools; numerical methods; fundamentals of engineering graphics and computer aided design including technical drawing conventions used in the energy industry, dimensioning and tolerances; applications using Computer-Aided Design (CAD) software.
360
Mechanics of Materials for Energy Engineering
Internal forces in trusses, beams, shafts, frames and machines. Axial-force, shear-force, bending-moment and internal-torque diagrams. The concept of stress. Normal and shear components in a co-ordinate system. The concept of strain and its components. Stress-strain relations. Elasticity. Hooke’s law and its generalization. Stress and deformation of uniaxially loaded members. Stress and deformation in the torsion of shafts of a circular cross section. Stress and deformation in transversely loaded beams of a symmetric cross section. General analysis of plane stress. Principal stresses. Mohr’s circle. Stress in structures subjected to combine loading.
400
Engineering Design and Economics
Design of chemical and oil & gas processing units and plants; cost estimates and chemical process economics; identifying market needs and commercialization considerations; Safety and environmental considerations in process design; critical thinking and problem solving skills development; case studies and projects may be drawn from a range of energy engineering areas.
425
Electricity, Magnetism and Electrical Circuits
Electric charges and electric current; Ohm's Law, Kirchhoff's Laws, application to simple circuits; Definitions of electric and magnetic fields. Introduction to circuit theory: DC circuits, amplifiers, operational amplifiers, single and three phase AC circuits. Introduction to basic electronic devices. Applications of mathematics to circuit analysis including solving systems of linear equations, first order derivatives and integrals, and complex numbers and arithmetic.
460
Dynamics for Energy Engineering II
Planar kinematics and kinetics of rigid bodies; work, energy, impulse and momentum of rigid bodies; kinematics, statics, and dynamics of planar mechanisms; design of cams, gears, and gear trains.
480
Energy Engineering Fluid Mechanics
Basic principles of mechanics of fluids; properties of fluids; fluids at rest; manometers and other pressure measuring devices; dimensional analysis; the laws of conservation of mass and momentum; Bernoulli's equation for incompressible flow and the energy equation; flow measurements; elementary pipe flow problems including losses, pumps, etc.; applications to a variety of problems in energy engineering. Applications of calculus and simultaneous linear equations to fluid mechanics, including applications of differential elements to derive material and momentum balances.
560
Energy Engineering Thermodynamics
Review of the principles of the first and second law of thermodynamics; application to the properties of fluids and solutions; vapour liquid and chemical equilibria; applications such as engine gas cycles including simple gas turbines; gas turbines with reheat, intercooling and heat exchange, heat-pump and refrigeration cycles. Applications of mathematics to thermodynamics including ordinary and partial differential equations, total differentials, integration, and curve-fitting.
570
Automation and Controls
Linear systems and their characteristics; the Laplace transform, block diagram manipulation, frequency response, application to first and second order physical systems; analysis and design of sensors and actuators; industrial automation systems, programmable logic controllers (PLC), supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems, distributed control systems (DCS).
Energy Management
5
301
Electricity Regulation
An examination of energy development and the business, law and policy issues arising from the development of different electricity sources (nuclear and renewable energy sources).
403
Overview of the Alberta Oil and Gas Industry
Provides an understanding of the upstream petroleum industry and will focus on the development of petroleum resources by Alberta-based corporations. Analysis of shale gas and oil development will be included.
485
Oil and Gas Marketing
Practical introduction to crude oil (light and heavy) and natural gas marketing. Marketing of refined oil products and retail gasoline are not covered.
487
Energy Risk Management
Provides an overview of key issues related to energy risk management. Some of the key topics to be addressed are: managing pricing risks associated with changing market conditions and deregulation; tools used to manage volatility, including futures and options for energy risk management; environmental risk management, and risk financing for the energy sector.
489
International Energy Development
A focus on international energy development, energy contracts, sustainable development, and the management of environmental and corporate social responsibility issues.
Engineering
34
200
Engineering Design and Communication
An interdisciplinary course involving the application of engineering principles, design, communications, leadership and project management concepts through a sequence of team-based design projects.
201
Behaviour of Liquids, Gases and Solids
An introduction to the behaviour of fluids and solids; phase transformations, the phase rule and phase diagrams. Ideal and real gases; equations of state and their engineering applications; simple kinetic theory; transport properties of fluids. Liquid state; vapor pressure; shear behaviour; flow of fluids in pipelines. Solids; crystalline and non-crystalline structure; non-equilibrium solid phases; electrical and thermal conductivity; dislocations; stress and strain; creep; fracture.
202
Engineering Statics
Force vectors; equilibrium of a particle in two and three dimensions; force system resultants; equilibrium of a rigid body in two and three dimensions; internal forces in trusses; frames, machines and beams; bending moment and shear force diagrams; friction; centre of gravity; centroids of areas; composite bodies.
209
Engineering Economics
The basic tools and methodology of engineering economic studies. Topics include investment decisions, theory of replacement, economies of scale, externalities, social decision making and government regulation. Examples are drawn from engineering projects.
213
Engineering Communication
Professional and technical communication with a focus on developing the ability to communicate complex engineering concepts to engineers as well as general audiences. Planning and composing effective verbal, written, and graphical communication. Providing constructive and professional review and critique of presentations by peers. Identifying key points and summarizing information in a concise and informative manner.
225
Fundamentals of Electrical Circuits and Machines
Current, voltage and power; Kirchhoff's current and voltage laws; capacitors; electricity and magnetism fundamentals applied to circuit elements and machines; inductors; topics in electrical circuits and systems; instrumentation; circuit design, DC and AC circuit analysis methods; DC and AC machines; first order circuits and transient analysis.
233
Computing for Engineers
Overview of computer systems. Functions of software components: operating systems, editors, compilers. Programming in a high-level language: selection and loop structures, routines, array and record types, text file operations. Introduction to object-based programming: use of class libraries and construction of simple classes.
311
Engineering Thermodynamics
Energy, thermodynamic systems, properties and state, temperature and the zeroth law, equilibrium, properties of the pure substance, equations of state. Work, reversibility, heat, first law, specific heats, enthalpy, ideal gas, flow systems. Entropy and the second law, Carnot cycle, thermodynamic temperature scale, process efficiencies, cycles, calculation of entropy change, exergy analysis.
317
Mechanics of Solids
Axial-force, shear-force and bending moment diagrams; stress and strain; stress-strain relations; elastic and plastic behaviour; elastic constants; simple statically indeterminate (one-degree) problems; review of moment of inertia, product of inertia and principal axes of inertia; elastic torsion of circular shafts; elastic and plastic bending about principal axes of beams with symmetrical cross-section; composite beams; shear stresses due to bending; Mohr's circle for stress; thin-walled pressure vessels; deflection of beams by integration; Euler buckling.
319
Probability and Statistics for Engineers
Presentation and description of data, introduction to probability theory, Bayes' theorem, discrete and continuous probability distributions, estimation, sampling distributions, tests of hypotheses on means, variances and proportions, simple linear regression and correlation. Applications are chosen from engineering practice.
349
Dynamics
Kinematics of particles and rigid bodies: rectilinear, curvilinear and general plane motion. Kinetics of particles and planar rigid bodies: Newton’s 2nd Law, Principle of Work and Energy, Principle of Impulse and Momentum. Introduction to three dimensional rigid body dynamics.
391
Advanced Topics I
Special topics in engineering and engineering complementary studies.
393
Advanced Topics II
Special topics in engineering and engineering complementary studies.
407
Numerical Methods in Engineering
The theory and use of numerical computational procedures to solve engineering problems. Methods for: solution of non-linear equations, solution of simultaneous linear equations, curve fitting, solution of the algebraic eigenvalue problem, interpolation, differentiation, integration, solution of ordinary differential equations and solution of partial differential equations are included. The tutorial includes the application to elementary problems and the computer solution of comprehensive engineering problems.
481
Technology and Society
An interpretive course on the interrelationship between technology and society. The first part of the course surveys significant historical developments within disciplinary areas such as energy, materials, production processes, structures, transport, communications, and computation. Sequence within each area: discovery, development, application, impact, future. Social and economic consequences are also considered. The latter part of the course explores contemporary problems of society and technology.
501
Senior Capstone Design Project I
A team-based design course in which students apply the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier courses while refining their skills in teamwork and project management. Students work towards innovative, solutions to industry-sponsored design projects, and engage in individual critical reflection on their course activities, team performance, and on their growth as an engineering designer within their undergraduate program.
502
Senior Capstone Design Project II
A continuation of the capstone design project, where student teams build on their design work in Part I.
503
Entrepreneurial Capstone Design Project I
A team-based design course in which students apply the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier courses while refining their skills in teamwork and project management. Students work towards innovative solutions to design projects with an entrepreneurial focus, and engage in individual critical reflection on their course activities, team performance, and on their growth as an engineering designer within their undergraduate program.
504
Entrepreneurial Capstone Design Project II
A continuation of the entrepreneurial capstone design project, where student teams build on their design work in Part I.
513
The Role and Responsibilities of the Professional Engineer in Society
The professional duties and responsibilities of the engineer as they relate to society. Ethics and the engineering profession. Public and worker safety and health. Design for safety. Sustainable development. The engineer and the environment. Environmental stewardship. Essentials of leadership. Gender issues. Employment equity. Fundamentals of Engineering Law. Professional organizations. The Engineering Professions Act.
515
Project Management for Engineers
Covers the application of project management principles such as planning, scope development, design, procurement, construction, commissioning and start-up to engineering projects. Class reviews aspects of a current major engineering projects and case studies.
517
Engineering Safety
Introduction to Professional Responsibility, Risk Management and Identification, Process Safety Management, Incident Investigation and Reporting; Engineering Ethics and Public Safety; Key national safety codes, standards and regulations, Business case for safety, and common best practices, fundamentals of Crisis and Emergency Management, change management to successful incorporate safety into teams and the design process; Engineering Discipline specific Engineering Safety Management including Electrical Safety, Chemical Safety, Fire, Dust Hazard and Explosions, and Biological Risks.
519
Special Topics in Engineering
Current topics in Engineering.
521
Art and Engineering
Focuses on history, concepts, contemporary issues, and techniques of engineering in art. Topics may include Arithmetic and Geometry, Proportion, Formalism, Symmetry, Computation, Geometric Abstraction, and Mathematics as they relate to historical, theoretical and critical contexts in Art. Students will gain experience and a working knowledge of concept development and construction of an engineering-inspired art project.
523
Bio-inspired Engineering
Engineering can take inspiration from nature to develop new products, processes, and systems, or improve existing designs. Topics in this course include design by analogy, functional biology, principles and techniques of biomimicry and bio-inspired engineering methods, and bio-inspired computation. Students will gain experience and a working knowledge of ideation, concept development and will model and create a bio-inspired engineering project.
525
Engineering Entrepreneurship
This highly experiential course helps the engineering student build a personal practice in entrepreneurship, design thinking, and human-centered design for innovation. Topics include the entrepreneurial mindset; idea generation, validation, and feasibility analysis; product pretotyping and prototyping; and the basics of business design and execution. Leading edge practical tools and frameworks are examined and put to use in authentic learning activities that teach the student to get to first revenues.
599
Individual Engineering Project
Individual work on an assigned Engineering project under the supervision of a faculty member. The project will normally involve a literature review, theoretical work, and laboratory or field work. Engineering Communications, including written reports, logbooks and oral presentations.
601
Professional Development I
Topics covered include: health and safety, communication styles, supervisory relationships and respect in the lab, presentation skills including presentation planning and voice projection, reference gathering and management, awareness of plagiarism, and writing abstracts.
603
Professional Development II
Topics covered include: presentation skills, skills for writing scientific manuscripts, peer review process, defence and candidacy, engineering design, intellectual property, and networking basics.
681
Engineering Tools
The theory and use of numerical computational procedures to solve engineering problems.
682
Sustainability
Explores the interaction between resources and the environment. Technical and environmental aspects within the energy and environment cycle for project evaluation and management.
683
Innovation and Entrepreneurship
Definitions, contexts, language, dynamics, historical and contemporary examples of Engineering Innovation and Entrepreneurship; innovation process from a multidisciplinary perspective; Engineering inventive processes.
684
Introduction to Project Management
Application of management principles to the project environment; planning, control, scope, time and cost processes; project organization and human resource issues. Students review aspects of a current major capital project and submit and defend a project report.
687
Ethics, Law, and the Engineering Profession
The professional duties and responsibilities of the engineer as they relate to society. Ethics and the engineering profession. Public and worker safety and health. Design for safety. Sustainable development. The engineer and the environment. Environmental stewardship. Essentials of leadership. Gender issues. Employment equity. Fundamentals of Engineering Law. Professional organizations. The Engineering Profession’s Act.
English
92
203
Introductory Seminar
An intensive introduction to the field of English emphasizing critical reading and writing as well as discussion. Expectations for writing and research will be higher than in other junior English courses. Includes the study of at least one text by an Indigenous author.
251
Literature and Society
An examination of the relationship of literature to the world around us, with instruction in close reading and critical writing. Considers how literature as a cultural practice responds to and reflects its social context. Includes the study of at least one text by an Indigenous author.
253
Studies in Genre

265
Introductory Creative Writing
Instruction in the rudiments of craft for poetry, scripts, and fiction, emphasizing the centrality of reading and revision to literary composition.
302
Introduction to Contemporary Theory
An examination of the claims and assumptions of a range of contemporary critical practices, such as formalism, structuralism, deconstruction, feminism and gender studies, new historicism, psychoanalytic criticism, and cultural and ideological critique. Includes sustained engagement with original theoretical texts.
303
Theories for Reading
An examination of contemporary critical and cultural theories and their practical applications to reading. Students will learn models of critical reading and gain experience applying them to a variety of literary and cultural texts.
305
Literature Before 1700
A survey of representative works of literature in English from the Middle Ages through 1700.
307
Literature After 1700
A survey of representative works of literature in English from 1700 to the Present.
309
Literature and the Environment
An examination of the field of nature writing, environmental literature and ecological literary criticism.
311
Shakespeare and Performance
A consideration of Shakespeare’s plays that pairs representative works with stage and/or film adaptations.
322
Comics
An examination of the formal, historical, and social aspects of comics (comic strips, comic books, and graphic novels). Topics to be examined include the historical development of the comic form; formal analysis of the properties of comics; and the significance of comics in the contemporary media landscape.
333
Experiential Learning and Reading
Approaches literary study through theories and practices of experiential learning. Incorporates multiple forms of critical written reflection on assigned literary texts and on reading as a form of experiential learning.
334
Literature and Community
Focuses on the literary treatment of an issue relevant to the larger community. Combines critical and literary readings with service in a community organization.
335
Creative Writing and Reading Like a Writer
Introduction to reading from a writerly perspective as an early but important step in the development of writing practice.
336
Introduction to Creative Writing Practice

351
Poetry: Reading and Analysis
A study of poetic forms in English from a wide range of historical periods, social contexts, and national literatures. Through textual analysis and close reading, acquaints students with the characteristic techniques of prosody and basic poetic terminology, giving detailed attention to tropes and figures along with other poetic concepts such as form, tone, diction, implication, and point of view.
353
Drama: Reading and Analysis
A study of dramatic literature in English from a wide range of historical periods, social contexts, and national literatures. Through textual analysis and close reading, acquaints students with the characteristic techniques of dramaturgy and basic theatric terminology, giving detailed attention to the formal conventions of literature written to be performed on stage.
361
Gender and Sexuality in Literature
Reading and analysis of gender and sexuality in literature. Topics may include queer theory; feminism and women’s writing; masculinity; transgender fictions and theory; gender and sexuality across regions, cultures, and/or historical periods; insectionality with, for instance, critical race theory, disability studies, and/or indigeneity.
372
Canadian Literature
A broad historical survey of Canadian writing from its origins to the present. An introduction to major writers and creative voices in Canada, as well as to significant critical and cultural ideas that have developed about this nation’s literature.
376
North American Indigenous Literatures
An overview of writing by North American Indigenous Peoples with a focus on authors from Canada.
378
Comparative Global Literatures
A comparative overview of literature from a range of regions around the world. May include an examination of post-colonial, diasporic, and globalization theories.
381
The History of English
An examination of important changes and stages in the history of English including its Indo-European and Germanic origins and a consideration of Modern English grammar and orthography from a historical perspective.
382
Topics in American Literature
A selected topic in American literature focused on a particular theme, time period or geographical region.
387
Current Topics in English Studies
Selected topics attentive to current and emergent research directions in the discipline.
388
Topics in Reading Popular Culture
Selected topics in popular culture across media, genres, time, and regions. Examination of popular texts as sites of cultural meaning and socio-political intervention and learn to assess their significance. Topics may include fan culture; television; film; music; performance; adaptation; the intersection of high and low culture; gaming; food; social media; and sport.
393
Speculative Fiction I: Science Fiction
Survey of the genre of science fiction, from its origins to the present
395
Speculative Fiction II: Fantasy
A survey of the genre of fantasy literature. May include works from a range of historical and national contexts.
396
Literature for Young People
A historical survey of children’s and young adult literature from its origins to the present day.
399
Detective Fiction
A survey of the genre of detective fiction. May include works from a range of historical and national contexts.
401
Old English Language and Prose Literature
A study of the language of the Anglo-Saxons through reading of prose texts.
403
Old English Poetry
Reading and analysis of Old English poetry in the original language.
405
Middle English Literature: The Canterbury Tales
A study of Geoffrey Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales in its social, cultural and historical contexts. Texts will be read in the original language and the course will include instruction in Middle English.
406
Middle English Literature: Selected Works
A study of selected works of Middle English poetry, prose and drama (excluding Geoffrey Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales) in their social, cultural and historical contexts. Texts will be read in the original language and the course will include instruction in Middle English.
410
Renaissance Literature and Culture I
A study of representative literary works from the reign of Henry VIII to Elizabeth I will be examined in their cultural and historical contexts. May include works by authors such as John Skelton, Sir Thomas More, Thomas Wyatt, Christopher Marlowe, Elizabeth I, Edmund Spenser, and William Shakespeare.
411
Renaissance Literature and Culture II
A study of representative literary works from the reigns of James I, and Charles I, and the English Civil War will be examined in their cultural and historical contexts. May include works by John Donne, George Herbert, Mary Wroth, Amelia Lanyer, Andrew Marvell and John Milton.
412
Early English Drama
A study of representative dramatic works from the emergence of the genre to 1600, including the medieval, Tudor, and Elizabethan periods. Works will be examined in their relevant historical contexts.
413
Shakespeare and his Contemporaries
An examination of the drama of the seventeenth century, examining works written for both public and private theatres as well as for court performance. Will include plays from major writers of the period such as William Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, and Thomas Middleton.
422
Advanced Studies in Comics
Considers the role and nature of comics (comic strips, comic books, graphic novels) as a distinct form. Topics may include the influence of comics genres; the relationship of comics to other art forms (including literature); major authors; and distinct historical or national cartooning traditions.
426
Selected Topics in Contemporary Theory
Advanced study in contemporary literary or cultural theory with a focus on a particular school, author, or approach.
429
Eighteenth-Century Poetry
An examination of the major poetic forms of the long eighteenth century with an emphasis on tradition and innovation in poetic techniques. Includes such authors as John Wilmot, Earl of Rochester; John Dryden; Aphra Behn; Alexander Pope; Jonathan Swift; Samuel Johnson; Thomas Gray; Stephen Duck; Ann Yearsley; Mary Collier; Mary Leapor; and Phillis Wheatley.
431
Restoration Voices
An exploration of the diverse literary and cultural productions of England during the years 1660-1700 with an emphasis on both court and common spheres. Topics may include the re-opening of the theatres; professional women writers; transatlantic conversations and encounters with indigeneity; newspapers and broadsides; comedy and satire; medicine and science; political and religious dissent; sexuality and gender; town versus country debates; and coffee house culture.
436
Creative Writing Workshop

438
Experiments in Early Fiction
A study of selected works of prose fiction to 1832 with an emphasis on the development of the novel in England and/or across the Atlantic. Includes such authors as Aphra Behn, Daniel Defoe, Eliza Haywood, Samuel Richardson, Henry Fielding, Laurence Sterne, Frances Burney, Frances Brooke, Charlotte Lennox, James Hogg, Maria Edgeworth, and Jane Austen.
441
British Romanticism
A study of selected British literary works from the period roughly between the 1780s and 1830s. Includes such authors as Jane Austen, William Wordsworth, William Blake, Percy Bysshe Shelley, and Mary Shelley.
445
Early to Mid-Victorian Literature
An examination of the Victorian novel, poetry, and prose. Includes such authors as Charles Dickens, Alfred Tennyson, Robert Browning, and the Brontës.
449
Late Victorian Literature
An examination of the poetry, prose, and drama of the 1880s and 1890s, with a focus on aestheticism and decadence. Includes such authors as Oscar Wilde, Vernon Lee, and Walter Pater.
451
British Literature from 1900 to 1950
A survey of British literature from the first half of the twentieth century.
453
British Literature since 1950
A survey of British literature from the last half of the twentieth century to the present.
459
Digital Research in Literary Studies
An introduction to digital research methods for literary studies. Topics may include text encoding and analysis, data visualization, and public scholarship.
461
Early American Literature and the American Renaissance
A survey of American literature from its origins to the Civil War. Examines both canonical and newly relevant works of literature and place them in a cultural and critical context.
463
American Literature from the Late 1800s to the Mid-1900s
A survey of American literature from the Civil War to World War II, encompassing realism, naturalism, and modernism. Examines both canonical and newly relevant works of literature and place them in a cultural and critical context.
465
American Literature since the Mid-1900s
A survey of American literature since World War II. Examines both canonical and newly relevant works of literature and place them in a cultural and critical context.
471
Canadian Literature from its Origins to 1950
A survey of Canadian literature from its beginnings to the middle of the twentieth century.
472
Advanced Studies in Young Adult Literature
Contemporary approaches to selected works of young adult literature. Topics may include the problem novel; dystopian literature; gender and sexuality; diversity in young adult books; banned/controversial books; fan culture; and young adults in the digital age.
473
Canadian Literature since 1950
A survey of Canadian literature from 1950 to the present.
477
Literature and Science
Study of the relationship between literature and science with respect to a special topic or theoretical approach. Course may cover advanced topics in science fiction such as Cyberpunk or Steampunk; how philosophies of science and technology pertain to literature; or interdisciplinary inquiry into literary texts using, for instance, neuroscience, ecology, and physics.
479
Studies in Text and Image
An examination of the relationship between the visual and literary. Students will develop a vocabulary for talking about visual texts and learn to articulate the shared and distinctive ways that these texts create meaning. Topics may include illustrated books and manuscripts; visual poetics; graphic novels; adaptation; digital literary forms; history of the book; and letterpress printing.
481
Literary Theory Pre-1900
A survey of the major theories and approaches to literature from antiquity to 1900.
486
Advanced Studies in Literature and the Environment
Selected topics in nature writing, environmental literature, ecocriticism and eco-theory. Topics may include climate change; bioregionalism; animals and animality; indigenous environmental perspectives; risk, disaster, and crises; pollution and waste; the body toxic; and dystopias.
487
Advanced Studies in Children’s Literature
Contemporary approaches to selected works of historical and/or contemporary children’s literature. Topics may include the Golden Age of children’s literature; picture books; literacy; censorship in children’s literature; gender and sexuality; genre; fan culture; reading in the digital age; storytelling; and diversity in children’s books.
491
Advanced Studies in Global Literatures
Focused study of post-colonial, transnational, and/or diasporic literatures, with an emphasis on a selection region, author(s), and/or particular theoretical approaches.
493
International Indigenous Literatures
Focused study of writing by indigenous peoples in an international context.  May be comparative in approach and/or focus on indigenous theoretical contexts.
495
Studies Across Literary History
A historical or transhistorical examination of a literary theme, genre, form, and/or writing and publication practice.
499
Topics in a Selected Author
Advanced study of a selected author. A close look at one writer's oeuvre in social, historical, or theoretical contexts.
504
Honours Project
Capstone seminar for English Honours students focusing on research methods and professional issues. Supports and includes the writing of the Honours thesis.
508
Advanced Seminar in a Literary Genre
An in-depth examination of a select literary genres in a critical context. Students will learn to develop research questions and conduct original research.
509
Advanced Seminar in Canadian Literature
An in-depth examination of a topic in Canadian literature in its critical context. Students will learn to develop research questions and conduct original research.
515
Advanced Seminar in Global/Indigenous Contexts
Advanced study of a particular topic in post-colonial, transnational, diasporic, and/or indigenous literary studies, with an emphasis on theoretical context. Students will learn to develop research questions and conduct original research.
517
Advanced Seminar in Theoretical and Cultural Studies
An in-depth examination of a topic involving advanced theoretical inquiry. Students will learn to develop research questions and conduct original research.
519
Advanced Seminar in a Historical Topic
An in-depth examination of historical literary or cultural texts in a critical context. Students will learn to develop research questions and conduct original research.
520
Community Engagement Through Literature
Combines classroom and community-based learning undertaken in association with the Calgary Public Library or other associated non-profit organizations that promote engagement with literature.
523
Advanced Seminar in Book and Digital Culture
Advanced topics in book history, digital humanities, and new media.
525
Advanced Seminar in a National or Transnational Literature
An in-depth examination of a national or transnational author, genre, or issue in a critical context.  Students will learn to develop research questions and conduct original research.
527
Advanced Seminar in a Selected Author
An in-depth examination of a selected author in a critical context. Students will learn to develop research questions and conduct original research.
529
Advanced Seminar in Popular/Experimental Genres
An in-depth examination of works or author that operate outside the traditional literary canon. May include the study of such topics as new or emergent literary forms; the cultural products of fan or digital culture; comics; bestselling genres such as true crime, fantasy, or romance; art books; and formally experimental literature in a historical or contemporary context. Students will learn to develop research questions and conduct original research.
593
Studies in Creative Writing: Poetry
A close examination and discussion of the student's own work, with emphasis on advanced technique.
594
Studies in Creative Writing: Prose Fiction
A close examination and discussion of the student's own work, with emphasis on advanced technique.
595
Studies in Creative Writing: Creative Non-Fiction
A close examination and discussion of the student's own work, with emphasis on advanced technique.
598
The Book-Length Manuscript
A close examination and discussion of the student's own work, with emphasis on advanced technique.
603
Topics in Genre
Specialized study of a topic involving a single genre or multiple genres.
605
Topics in National or Transnational Literatures
Specialized study of a topic in national or transnational literary studies, in a critical context.
607
Topics in Theoretical and Cultural Studies
Specialized study of a topic involving theoretical inquiry.
609
Topics in a Literary Period
Specialized study of a topic in a literary period in its critical context.
677
Topics in Canadian Literature
Specialized study of a topic in Canadian literature in its critical context.
681
Topics in Literary Criticism
Specialized study of a topic in the field of literary criticism.
685
Special Topics
Specialized study of a topic in the field of literary studies.
691
Graduate Pro-seminar
Introduces incoming graduate students to critical skills and professional issues in graduate level literary studies.
693
Topics in Creative Writing: Poetry
A close examination and discussion of the student's own work, with emphasis on advanced technique.
694
Topics in Creative Writing: Prose Fiction
A close examination and discussion of the student's own work, with emphasis on advanced technique.
695
Topics in Creative Writing: Creative Non-Fiction
A close examination and discussion of the student's own work, with emphasis on advanced technique.
698
Topics in Creative Writing: The Book-Length Manuscript
A close examination and discussion of the student's own work, with emphasis on advanced technique in a selected genre(s).
710
Capstone Project
Independent research and original work to be undertaken under the direction of a faculty member in English, after all required course work has been completed.
Entrepreneurship and Innovation
26
201
Introduction to Business Venturing
Introduction to the various business disciplines from the perspective of creating a new business venture. The primary learning methodology is a term project; students identify a business opportunity, research the opportunity, and write a business plan for the business.
317
Entrepreneurial Thinking
Leaders in today's business environment are challenged to think entrepreneurially - to seek opportunities and find ways to turn opportunities into viable for-profit business ventures, social ventures or not-for-profit organizations. They are challenged to do more than just business; giving back to society is expected. The primary learning methodology is through a project in which an opportunity is identified, researched, and the results of a feasibility assessment are written and presented.
359
Selected Topics in Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Investigation of selected topics related to entrepreneurship and innovation, emphasizing both generally applicable practical applications and academic research, as well as specific industries or contexts.
381
Principles of Entrepreneurship
Overview of the process of entrepreneurship with focus on the role of the entrepreneur in new venture initiative and development. Introduction to the processes involved in: idea generation, evaluation, business planning or operations.
401
Opportunity Identification
Application of knowledge of the processes involved in idea generation and evaluation ending in the technical, market, financial and human resource feasibility of a concept. Critical literature will be reviewed as it applies to the early stages of concept development and evaluation.
403
New Venture Planning
A project-based course in developing and writing a business plan for an existing and/or growth oriented venture. Focus will be given to the content, form and uses of a formal business plan.
405
New Venture Start-Up
Application of the strategies and tactics for the creation and growth of a potential new venture. Key questions in bringing together critical resources to launch a venture are addressed, and important empirical research in the field is reviewed. Project work participation is required.
407
Technology for Entrepreneurs
Explores emerging internet-based technologies and digital tools that support, improve and transform the nature of entrepreneurship. Involves hands-on exercises using various tools and practice providing technology recommendations.
411
Technology Commercialization
Investigation of building the founding team, marketing, financing, hiring human resources, and implementing growth strategies, emphasizing the practical application of theory and principles to a high technology business setting.
413
Social Enterprise Strategies
Social enterprise uses the logic of business to solve social challenges. Explores themes on entrepreneurial thinking, business model development, impact measurement, and other issues to create and improve social enterprises.
531
Entrepreneurship Law

559
Selected Topics in Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Investigation of selected topics related to entrepreneurship, venture development and family business, emphasizing the practical application of theory and principles to actual business situations and venture opportunities.
601
Entrepreneurial Thinking
Business leaders are challenged to think entrepreneurially – to seek opportunities and find ways to turn opportunities into viable ventures. These may be for-profit, not-for-profit, or social ventures. Students will engage in experiential learning to complete a feasibility assessment of such an opportunity, including the concept of giving back to society.
672
Thinking like an Entrepreneur
Focuses on identifying and successfully exploiting opportunities by applying research and analytical tools. Some of the topics covered include design thinking and business modelling.
674
Innovation in Organizations
Focuses on innovation in different organizational contexts (e.g. established and start-up organizations, public and privately owned, or government and not-for-profit).
731
New Venture Law
Legal principles impacting business decisions regarding new venture creation, growth and routine business operations. Topics may include: corporate structure, directors' and officers' liability, financing, intellectual property law, contracts and regulations.
735
Cultivating Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Designed to leverage innovative and effective ideas so as to take advantage of opportunities, effectively incorporate innovation and entrepreneurship throughout the organization, and create an environment where new ideas that add value must be an organizational priority.
781
Introduction to Entrepreneurship
An experience-based course covering the prestart-up stage of business development through group projects and case studies designed to provide experience-based skill development in creativity, idea generation, and feasibility analysis.
783
Opportunity Development
A project- and case-based course designed to explore concepts of opportunity development.
785
Venture Development
A project-based course designed around the formation of business concepts in the formalization of a business plan.
787
Applied Business Analysis
Approaches to advising new and existing ventures on effective venture development. Projects will involve the student conducting analysis of several ventures and providing advice to them.
789
Seminar in Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Study and discussion of current research literature and contemporary issues on topics related to Entrepreneurship and Innovation.
791
Technology Commercialization
The process of taking a technology product or service from development to the market, including market strategies, finding investors and potential early customers, the role of advisors, legal issues and the importance of the exit strategy for founders and early stage investors. Students will be required to complete a major project to write a feasibility study for a new technology or a case study of a successful technology venture.
793
Technology and Innovation Management
The dynamics of innovation as the primary driving force within firms and modern industrialized economies. Potential concepts are: incremental versus radical innovations, market-pull versus technology-push theories, dominant designs, technological trajectories, key factors for successful innovation. The emergence of new technologies; the importance of national and regional innovation systems; the role of science, regulations and social pressure in innovations dynamics; knowledge management; and implications for firms in rapidly changing industrial settings may be discussed.
797
Advanced Seminar in Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Intensive study and discussion of current literature and research with respect to selected, advanced topics in Entrepreneurship and Innovation. May include formal academic or applied research project.
799
Doctoral Seminars in Venture Development

Environmental Design
39
401
Introduction to Architecture, Planning and Landscape Architecture
An examination of the central concepts of architecture, planning and landscape architecture delivered in an online format.
402
Design, Digital Technology and the Built Environment
An introduction to the fundamental principles underlying modern digital technology-based systems, from a design of the built environment perspective. Topics include The Attention Economy, Big Data, Surveillance Capitalism, Ambient Intelligence, the Internet of Things, Opaque and Transparent Algorithms, Biocreepiness, and Systems Thinking. No specific technical background is required. Participants will complete a design project on a topic of personal interest.
502
Designing Powerful Communication
Accurate and persuasive communication is becoming increasingly vital to accomplish our goals, whether they are to present research, defend a thesis, or make a compelling argument in the workplace. Participants will iteratively design professional quality oral presentations on a topic of personal interest. In addition to understanding the psychology of communication, students will learn how to determine which communication techniques are most appropriate for specific purposes.
523
Sustainability in the Built Environment
The principle of sustainability recognizes people as temporary stewards of their environments, working toward a respect for natural systems and a higher quality of life. Examination of the built environment and the tools to achieve a stable and balanced and a regenerative ecosystem in a process of responsible consumption, wherein waste is minimized and the built environment interacts with natural environments and cycles. Healthful interior environments, resource efficiency, ecologically benign materials, renewable energies and social justice issues are examined.
583
Special Topics in Environmental Design
Thematic inquiry and design related to environmental design topics.
597
Special Topics in Environmental Design
Thematic inquiry and design related to environmental design topics.
601
Conceptual Bases of Environmental Design
Conceptual frameworks in Environmental Design and theories related to design and environment that influence environmental design thinking, research, and practice.
603
Introduction to Design Thinking
Foundation concepts in design and form making involving a sequence of progress skill building, visual and spatial thinking and problem solving exercises.
616
Urban Infrastructure and Land Use
Acquaints students with the key infrastructure systems of a city. Examines current policies, standards and practices, challenges, and innovations in the following infrastructure sectors: water, sewage, waste management, open space, energy, transportation, and communication. Discusses the relationship between infrastructure systems and land use, and its impacts on quality of life, economic development, spatial structure, and the environment. Emphasis is given to green infrastructure development. The course also examines various financial and institutional frameworks for delivering infrastructure systems, and how they vary across different contexts.
620
Urban Design Studio
This studio aims to further develop skills in conceptualization and visualization through consideration of contemporary urban design issues. It includes documentation and analysis of urban form and process, and explores site planning and design of the public realm. Issues of local and regional identity and sustainability inform the approach of the studio.
621
Health in the Built Environment
Concepts of health in an environmental context; historic approaches to preventative medicine; medical basis of building-related illness; case studies in indoor air quality; strategies for prescription and design of healthy indoor environments.
622
Real Estate Development and Finance
Focuses on the principles of real estate development and finance. Provides hands-on experience through real-world simulations and case studies. Goal is for students to gain a basic understanding of the planning process in real estate development, including private public partnerships, and development impacts. Introduces fundamental tools for conducting an economic and fiscal analysis of real estate proposals. Students will have an opportunity to develop a pro forma as part of a risk assessment. Other topics include the use of GIS for location studies and market assessment.
624
Impact Assessment and Risk Management
EIA is the process of identifying, predicting, evaluating and mitigating the environmental effects of development proposals prior to major decision-making. Biophysical, economic and social impact assessment will be reviewed in an integrated, interdisciplinary approach which will include lectures, studies of methodologies, theory and practical problems, and discourse with practitioners. Federal and various Provincial environmental impact assessment policies and procedures will be critically analyzed.
628
Housing and Neighbourhood Change
Considers urban growth management, affordable housing, suburban growth and inner-city redevelopment, current suburban development patterns, as well current municipal goals regarding density and intensification and precedents/best practices. Theoretical understanding and practical insights into these issues through assessment of the social, economic, and spatial aspects related to housing and neighbourhood change.
630
Geography of Crime
Introduces the fields of environmental criminology and the social and geographic aspects of crime. Explores the reasons why certain neighbourhoods, and certain features of neighbourhoods, tend to promote or discourage criminal activity. Special emphasis is placed upon the relationship between crime and the environment, crime prevention, spatial dynamics of crime, the criminality of place and the decision processes involved in criminal events. Ethical considerations and privacy aspects will be addressed throughout.
632
Designing Safe Communities
Based on the established training curriculum for certification of the SAFE Design Council, with supplementary material to increase the theoretical foundations of the topics. The SAFE Design Standard® begins with the assessment of the risk posed to a site by outside factors, and then includes an assessment of site access points, wayfinding and signage, pathways and roadways, barriers and fencing, visibility and illumination, mechanical and electronic security, and other design elements intended for controlling access and movement within a building or site.
634
Designing Smart Communities
Provides an introduction to the emerging field of Smart Communities, showcasing groups and individuals that have made a conscious and deliberate effort to use information and communications technology (ICT) to transform the community’s life and work in significant and fundamental ways. Smart Communities may be physical or virtual, and the concept is more about the creative use of ICT infrastructure than merely building it. The social, economic, technical, design and ethical aspects of Smart Communities will all be considered.
636
Integrative Project
A capstone project course involving an independent, guided research project, which builds on student interests and faculty expertise. The projects may be completed individually or in small groups. The course will involve an initial face-to-face project definition session, online mentoring throughout the project, and final presentations on lessons learned and future research directions.
640
Regional Planning Studio
An overview of the history and theory of regional planning and an overview of regional planning institutional frameworks and issues in a Canadian regional planning context. Understanding current regional planning issues and institutional, legislative and policy frameworks in a Canadian land use planning context related to growth management, resource extraction, infrastructure and services, transportation, strategic planning, water and airshed management. A review and examination of regional land use planning and policy tools and role of regional planners in inter-jurisdictional and transboundary government and public-private stakeholder engagement mechanisms. Preparation of a plan.
643
Field Studies
Introduction to the architecture, urban landscape, planning issues, design culture and other relevant faculty topics in an international setting. Specific destination and itinerary in any given year are dependent on availability and interest. Through a week long field trip students will learn about the built and natural environment of the selected city and its context.
650
Theories of Sustainable Urban Design
Covers contemporary urban design history as well as seminal urban design theory. Also includes a review of the most up-to-date research in sustainable urban design, including its relationship to public health, global warming and adaptability to climate change trends.
652
Site/Context Analysis and Sustainable Design Studio
Introduces the student to an analytical and comprehensive approach for understanding a project’s site and context. Provides the student with tools and methods for the implementation of a sustainable urban design proposal in different climatic, environmental and cultural settings.
654
Green Infrastructure and Land Use
Acquaints the student with the latest knowledge and technology in green urban infrastructure and sustainable practices of land use planning, including aspects of winter city design. Includes various site visits to state-of-the-art infrastructure facilities and lectures from invited experts.
656
Advanced Urban Design Studio

660
Principles of Historic Conservation
Provides a foundation to historic conservation. Focuses on principles and theories pertaining to preservation and restoration practices; recognition of architectural periods, styles, and construction methods in context of the evolution of cultural landscapes; the definition of significance and integrity in buildings and districts; strategies by which buildings and their settings have been preserved and used; and methods of reading and interpreting the cultural environment. Also includes a review of the most up-to-date research in heritage conservation.
662
Heritage Conservation Policy and Planning
This practice-based course prepares students to act in some capacity as manager, architect, planner, and policy maker for historic sites and buildings. Provides an overview of the aspects of heritage conservation related to policy and planning. Reviews preservation policy and jurisdictional issues within a community development context, addresses complex social equity considerations associated with historic designation, examines economic incentives, and explores preservation philosophy and historic impact assessments. Includes visits to heritage sites and lectures from invited experts.
664
Sustainability and Historic Preservation

668
Advanced Heritage Conservation Project
Provides an opportunity to work in an interdisciplinary manner to address real issues related to heritage conservation. Includes the development of a comprehensive heritage conservation proposal based on site and context analysis of a site in Alberta. The project will use the framework of the Historic Places Initiative (Identify, Protect and Preserve) to document buildings, districts and cultural landscapes and to interpret their historical and architectural significance. An Identification component will consider heritage resource documentation and evaluation; a Protection component will review heritage legislation, regulatory frameworks, and incentive programs; and a Preservation component will examine standards and guidelines, and preservation strategies and techniques.
671
Urban Design Theory
Intended to provide students with an introduction to theories, concepts, methods and contemporary issues in urban design. The course consists of lectures, case studies, seminars and short projects.
675
Urban Systems
Provides a general overview of urban history, development and planning traditions. Lectures and field studies give a chronological overview of urban, architectural and design history and the inter-relation to political programs, economic and strategic planning as well as cultural nationalism. The course will extract a number of more general issues about contemporary cities for debate.
683
Advanced Special Topics in Environmental Design
Thematic inquiry and design related to environmental design topics.
697
Advanced Special Topics in Environmental Design
Thematic inquiry and design related to environmental design topics.
703
Directed Study in Environmental Design
Thematic research, readings or design studio project related to environmental design topics.
711
Theoretical Basis for Interdisciplinary Intervention and Design
Comparisons and contrasts among disciplinary, multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary intervention and research. Focus on interdisciplinary teamwork knowledge and skills, on the ability to integrate research into professional real world contexts and on the ability to communicate research results effectively. This course is open only to students registered in a PhD program.
723
Interdisciplinary Intervention in Environmental Design

753
Research Skills and Critical Thinking
Exploration of the research process in an environmental design context and using design as a method of research. Design of innovative research methods appropriate for environmental design research. Development of skills in research design and critical thinking while writing a research proposal.
783
Directed Study in Environmental Design
Thematic research, readings or design studio project related to urban design, architecture, environmental design topics.
793
Workshop in Environmental Design
Instruction and supervised experience in the use of tools and equipment for the development of study models, prototypes and graphic material related to student projects.
797
Preceptorship
A Preceptorship is a study and training arrangement made between a student and an employer or an equivalent supervisor which has specific educational objectives, a method of evaluation, and is an integral part of a student's Program of Studies. Preceptorships offer a number of benefits: acquiring skills and knowledge which may be better obtained outside the University; developing first-hand experience of professional design practice; preparing for more focused studies in the Faculty; and conducting research.
Environmental Design Architecture
17
511
Building Science and Technology I
Functioning of the building enclosure: demonstration of the behaviour of building elements and their sub-assemblies under differential temperature and pressure stresses; fundamentals of acoustics; nature and use of building materials; response of building materials to climatic cycles radiation, precipitation, heating and cooling.
523
History of Architecture and Human Settlements

541
Graphics Workshop I
A skill building course with instruction and supervised experience in basic drafting, sketching and rendering; principles of perspective, drawing and presentation conventions. A variety of instruction may be offered to accommodate the varied level of student development.
543
Graphics Workshop II

580
Studio I – Design Thinking
Foundation concepts in design and form making involving a sequence of progress skill building, visual and spatial thinking and problem-solving exercises.
582
Studio II in Architecture
An introduction to the application of ordering principles of architecture and to the numerous layers that contribute to the quality of inhabitation of place and space through design. Issues explored include the formal, the experiential and the theoretical concerns of architectural design in today's cultural context.
611
Building Science and Technology II
Theory and principles of structural, foundation and building service systems. Application of building science principles to building structure and enclosure, examination of the types and manufacture of building elements and the application of building components to specific problems in architecture.
613
Structures for Architects I
Fundamentals of Structural Analysis including the characteristics and performance of the various components of structures; the terminology and notation necessary for effective teamwork with structural engineering consultants; and basic design calculations for simple structures.
615
Environmental Control Systems
Approaches to the design of heating, cooling, and ventilation systems for buildings. Issues in system design such as energy efficiency and indoor air quality.
617
Architectural Lighting Design
Fundamentals of light and visual perception. Approaches to the design of non-uniform and uniform lighting systems for buildings. Issues in system design such as human satisfaction, performance and energy efficiency. Development of skills in the selection and design of lighting systems.
619
Structures for Architects II
Advanced structural systems for buildings including: structural connections and composite structures; system characteristics and architectural intent; and case studies in contemporary building structures.
621
Introduction to Design Theories
The contemporary cultural, social, and philosophical arenas in which architecture exists are examined through lectures, readings and seminars.
661
Architectural Professional Practice
The nature of the building industry, stakeholders and many of the participants and their responsibilities. Brings together the theoretical framework of the architect's role in society with the practicality of managing a practice. Project management and office administration, trends, liabilities and systems for project control such as building economics; cost analysis and estimating techniques; and cost controls during design and construction.
665
Leadership in Architecture
The practice of architecture deals with complex design requirements, diverse groups of people, changing processes, evolving contexts, and a range of modes of production. This course introduces students to a broad set of contemporary themes around the concept of leadership and architecture.
682
Intermediate Architectural Design Studio

703
Directed Study in Architecture
Research and readings in architecture and design related to the Senior Research Studio in Architecture.
782
Senior Research Studio in Architecture
A research  design studio in which students collaborate with design faculty in exploring projects that engage contemporary issues defining the built and natural environments.
Environmental Design Landscape
13
603
Site Technology I: Grading and Landform
Provides a working knowledge of grading, landform and storm water management systems and techniques. Covers fundamentals and advanced technologies including GPS grading and landform manipulation.
605
Site Technology II: Construction and Materials
Provides a working knowledge of landscape construction methods and materials through practical application of theories and techniques via a design project.
607
GIS for Landscape Architecture

609
Advanced Digital Design, Representation and Communication for Landscape Architecture
Digital media offers a variety of tools and techniques to experiment, communicate and visualize their ideas and to collaborate with colleagues, allied professionals, and the public. Provides instruction in current methods and techniques of digital media used in the research and practice of landscape architecture, as well as state-of-the-art communication, collaboration and visualization hardware and software.
629
Landscape Architecture History and Theory
An introduction to the history, theory and contemporary issues of landscape architecture. Develop a critical awareness of major conceptual frameworks, and the socio-political contexts in which they developed, both conceptually and in realized projects.
639
Landscape Responses to Climate Change, Energy and Water
Identifies landscape-oriented solutions to local and global issues of climate change, energy, and water problems through research and project proposals. Provides the opportunity to identify the most pressing local, regional or international issues and develop solutions.
641
Green Infrastructure/Winter City Design
An introduction to the systems of urban and regional resource management through targeted green infrastructure projects, particularly in a winter city context. Provides background on current methods, the state-of-the-art, and research and development that will shape future technologies. Identifies contemporary approaches, sociocultural, and ecological concepts for using plant material in landscapes, green roofs and biomass.
643
Professional Practice and Project Management for Landscape Architecture
An introduction to the professional practice of landscape architecture. Includes the legal and ethical frameworks for practice, as well as project management.
645
Plants in the Landscape
Introduces students to plant taxonomy, plant identification, and planting design. Covers both natural and designed landscapes, and focuses on plant materials appropriate in the context of Calgary and region.
667
Landscape Architecture Studio I
An integration of skills and processes developed to this point in the program through an investigation into a topical, issue-based problem, and development of solution(s) in a landscape context.
668
Landscape Architecture Studio II
An integration of skills and processes developed to this point in the program through an investigation into a topical, issue-based problem, and development of solution(s) in a landscape context. Builds on skills and knowledge from previous studios and is a progression in terms of complexity and design process.
767
Regional Landscape Systems Studio
An introduction to landscape planning and design at the regional scale. Particular emphasis on the interrelationships between biophysical (i.e. ecological, geological) systems and anthropogenic (i.e. social, political, economic) systems and processes as agents of landscape transformation, and determinants of form.
777
Senior Research Studio in Landscape Architecture
A research-oriented project studio that explores contemporary themes in landscape architecture. Centres on a real world problem or project; the analysis of issues and context, and the formulation of a comprehensive design solution involving advanced methods, techniques and practices.
Environmental Design Planning
11
602
Computer Modelling for Urban Design
Introduction to the use of computer modelling, animation and virtual reality in urban design. Professional CAD and rendering applications will be used to explore the aesthetic and technical aspects of design. Emphasis given to developing sensitivity to the application appropriate to communicating three dimensional urban and natural form using computer generated images.
611
Geographic Information Systems for Environmental Design
Introduction to the use of GIS in urban planning and environmental management. GIS modelling focusing on population projection, location theory, land use modelling and environmental and ecological management. Case studies from both the public and private sector provide the basis of assignments. Emphasis given to developing sensitivity to the application appropriate for specific GIS problems.
621
Professional Planning Practice
Considers various plans, policies, regulatory processes, legal institutions and administrative frameworks involved in urban and regional planning. Examines the role of planners in municipal development processes related to land use re-designations, development permits, subdivision and appeals. Discusses professional planning issues including ethics, relationships with clients, the public, and other professions. Discusses practice options for graduates including professional certification/registration.
625
Site Planning Studio
Introduction to urban design practice. Emphasizes sense of place, human behaviour/built form relationships and sustainability. Completion of a series of progressively complex site planning projects. Skills development in hand and computer-aided drawing to describe, document and analyze urban form and processes and to develop physical plans.
626
Landscape Ecology and Planning
Key concepts in ecology, landscape ecology and environmental science relevant to planning at landscape scales. Principles of urban ecology, regional landscape ecology, watershed management and parks and protected area design are coupled with knowledge of landscape processes, ecosystem services, ecological infrastructure, and habitat to assess planning interventions in the built and natural environments. Skills are developed in geographic information systems (GIS) for monitoring the current state of landscapes and potential challenges to landscape function and for proposing solutions to these challenges. Includes guest speakers from government and industry, GIS exercises and field visits to various areas within the region.
627
Planning History and Theory
An introduction to theories and practices of planning with a focus on the late nineteenth century to the present. Explores the forces that shaped cities/regions and key ideas/models invented in response. Examines the relationship between theory/practice and past/present. Explores the influence of planners, architects, landscape architects, and others on planning theory and resulting physical form. Presents case studies and examples in the Canadian context. Develops a critical awareness of the roles of environmental design professionals within a framework that of technical, social, environmental and political factors.
632
Planning and Public Engagement
Overview of key principles and theories, and contemporary issues and tools of participation and public engagement as it applies to planning. Consideration of public engagement, facilitation, negotiation and conflict resolution processes from the point of view of community activists, city planners, developers and planning/design professionals. Development and implementation of public engagement plans.
634
Project Management for Planners
Principles, techniques and tools of project management. Development, administration, monitoring and evaluation of implementation plans, including financial aspects are discussed. Project risk analysis and management.
635
Analytic Methods for Planners
Approaches to identify, gather and critically analyze strategic information needed to assess planning situations and support decision-making. Focuses on both quantitative and qualitative planning methods. Techniques to present information effectively.
636
Community Planning Studio
Introduction to land use planning and development issues. Provides a step-by-step introduction to community planning processes and essential planning policies to create development that is economically feasible, socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable.
644
Advanced Professional Planning Studio
An advanced studio exploring contemporary themes in planning and professional planning practice. Centres on a real world problem or client project; involves analysis, synthesis, and formulation of a planning or urban design solution. Culminates in a professional report and presentation.
Environmental Engineering
31
603
Principles of Environmental Engineering
Mass and energy balance for reacting and non-reacting environmental engineering systems under steady state and unsteady state conditions. Fundamentals of momentum, heat and mass transfer as applied in air and water pollution. Thermodynamic and phase equilibria considerations. Contaminant partitioning and transport in air, surface water and groundwater. Chemical reaction kinetics. Application of ideal continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) and plug flow reactor (PFR) concepts in environmental engineering. Residence time distribution (RTD) and reactor non-idealities. Introduction to life cycle analysis.
605
Environmental Chemistry and Microbiology
Chemistry of organic and inorganic contaminants in the environment. Natural chemical cycles in the biosphere, geosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere, and consequences of anthropogenic disturbances. Aquatic, atmospheric and soil chemistry. The fate of hazardous, refractory and heavy metal pollutants in the environment. Introductory toxicological chemistry and atmospheric chemistry. Analytical techniques for contaminants in air, water, energy and soil. Introductory microbiology: characteristics and classification of microorganisms, kinetics and mathematical models of microbial growth, applications in environmental engineering. Introduction to ecology.
616
Environmental Fluid Mechanics
Overview of fluid mechanics fundamentals; Boundary layer theory; Turbulence theory; Turbulent structures; Simulation of environmental flow and transportation of air pollutants; Dynamics of particulates dispersed in gases; Environmental applications (Two-phase flow and particulate removal; Turbulence and dispersion in low atmosphere).
619
Special Topics
New courses on specialized topics relevant to environmental engineering. It may also be offered to doctoral degree students to enable them to pursue advanced studies in particular areas under the direction of a faculty member, which must be arranged and approved prior to registration.
620
Water Quality
Water quality parameters, indicators of water pollution, pesticides, nutrients and other contaminants in water, fate and distribution of effluents in water bodies, water treatment options.
621
Experimental Design and Error Analysis
Statistical analysis and design of engineering experiments. Random variables and sampling distributions; estimation and hypothesis testing; concepts of central tendency, variability, confidence level; correlation, regression and variation analysis; robust estimation; experiments of evaluation; experiments of comparison; factorial experiments (analysis of variance); experimental designs (involving randomization, replication, blocking and analysis of covariance).
623
Air Dispersion Modelling
Regulations and policy. Mathematical models of contaminant transport in the atmosphere. Atmospheric thermodynamics. Turbulence in the planetary boundary layer. Turbulence and air pollution meteorology. Gaussian plume. Gradient transport and higher-order closure models. Point, area and line sources. Similarity theories. Basic statistical methods applied to turbulent flows. Urban air shed modelling. Theoretical development and practical applications to engineering problems. Air dispersion modelling using computer software.
625
Numerical Methods for Engineers
Introduction, mathematical modelling, sources of errors in the process of numerical analysis and solution methodology; Elements of numerical analysis, Taylor series, round-off error, truncation error, concept of stability, consistency and convergence; Linear algebra, normal forms, Gauss elimination method, LU-decomposition, tridiagonal systems of equations; iterative methods, Jacobi, Gauss-Seidel, SOR, SSOR methods, conjugate gradient methods and preconditioning and principles of the multi-grid methods; Elliptic "equilibrium" equation, Laplace and Poisson equations, finite difference and finite control volume concepts and stability analysis; Parabolic equations: explicit, implicit and Crank-Nicolson methods, time-splitting method, method of lines, Stability analysis; Hyperbolic equations; Introduction to other methods; future challenging problems.
627
Contaminant Transport
Mathematical models for contaminant transport in ground water. Flow/transport through porous media, advection, dispersion, diffusion. Sources and sinks. Applications of analytical finite element and finite difference equations, Environmental modelling using computer software.
630
Spatial Databases and Data Mining
Comprehensive overview of spatial database management systems and issues related to spatial data mining. Topics include: overview of spatial databases, spatial concepts and data models, spatial query languages, spatial storage and indexing, spatial networks, spatial data mining, and trends in spatial databases.
631
Spatial Statistics for Environmental Modelling
Spatial statistics for topological, geometric and geographic properties. Spatial statistical models for data having an explicit spatial distribution. Basic and advanced methods in geo-spatial statistics for point, area and continuous variables. All levels (from visual to analytical) of possible spatial analysis techniques are examined for each type of variable and applications in environmental modelling are used to illustrate the concepts.
633
Fuzzy Logic for Environmental Engineering
Complex, non-linear, or ambiguous system models. Fuzzy set theory, fuzzy logic operations, fuzzification and de-fuzzification. Development of membership functions, fuzzy system simulation, Rule-based reduction methods, Fuzzy classification and pattern recognition, Fuzzy arithmetic and extension principle, Fuzzy Control and Fuzzy cognitive mapping, applications in environmental engineering.
635
Environmental Modelling
Nature and purpose of environmental modelling; the top-down and the bottom-up approaches; typology of environmental models; definition of fundamental concepts; steps involved in designing and building a model; calibration, verification and validation of models; scale dependency; sensitivity analysis; characteristics, architecture and functioning of selected environmental models.
637
Earth Observation for the Environment
An introduction to environmental earth observation systems in particular to satellite platforms. Topics include: discussion of physical principles; imaging system geometries; radiometric corrections, including calibration and atmospheric correction; spatial filtering for noise removal and information extraction; geometric corrections, including rectification and registration; fusion of multi-dimensional datasets; and application of satellite images in addressing selected environmental issues.
639
Advanced Topics in Sensor Web and Internet of Things
Overview of the sensor web architecture and algorithms, with a focus on Internet of Things. Topics include: sensor web data management, sensor web search and discovery, sensor web server design and implementation, interoperability issues, sensor-based analytics and visualization, introduction to sensor networks, and trends in sensor web and Internet of Things.
641
Air Pollution Control Engineering
Introduction to air quality and air pollution. Energy and air pollution. Fossil fuel combustion and related air pollution. Industrial air pollution control. Control of particulate matter. Control of VOCs, SOx, and NOx. Adsorption, absorption and biofiltration of air pollutants. GHG emission control. Recent advances on related topics.
643
Air Pollutant Sampling and Characterization
Fundamentals and principles of air pollutant sampling and characterization. Kinematics of gases. Principles of gaseous pollutant sampling. Aerosol technology. Isokinetic sampling. Statistics and data analyses for airborne particulate matter. Particle size and concentration measurements. Indoor air quality assessment.
645
Data Mining and Machine Learning
Types of data mining: classification, clustering, association, prediction. Processes: data preparation, model building. Techniques: decision tree, neural network, evolutionary computing, Bayesian network. Applications: multi-media, text and web mining.
647
Grid-Connected Inverters for Alternative Energy Systems
Analysis and design of grid-connected inverters fed by an alternative energy source. Switch mode converters, inverter topologies, harmonics, drive electronics, control methodologies, implementation techniques, course project.
651
Solid Waste Engineering
Analysis and implementation of solid waste minimization strategies. Aerobic biological treatment of waste. Landfill bioreactors for energy recovery. Performance-based design of landfills, soil-chemical interactions and implications. Leachate migration in unsaturated/saturated zones. Design and construction of barrier systems. Leachate collection systems. Landfill closure issues. Life cycle assessment of waste management systems.
653
Contaminated Soil Remediation
Overview of soil remediation engineering. Contaminant partitioning in air, water and gas phases. Phases of site assessments, Physical and chemical treatment processes, soil vapour extraction, air sparging, soil washing, soil flushing, thermal desorption and incineration, solidification and stabilization, vitrification, biological treatment processes, bioremediation kinetics, ex situ and in situ techniques. Liquid phase bioremediation as it pertains to soil remediation.
655
Hazardous Waste and Contaminated Sites Management
Integrated waste management. Functional and fundamental properties of hazardous waste. Toxicological properties of contaminants. Contaminant release mechanisms. Fate and transport of contaminants in the environment. Contaminated site assessment principles. Quantitative human health risk assessment (QHHRA) as applied to contaminated sites. Hazard identification, exposure pathway analysis, risk characterization. Risk management and site remediation. Methods of hazardous waste treatment and contaminated site remediation. Secure land disposal of hazardous waste and contaminated soils and sludges.
661
Industrial and Produced Wastewater Treatment
Sources and characterization of industrial wastewater. Treatment objectives and regulations. Unit and process design. Physical/chemical treatment including sedimentation, coagulation, filtration, absorption, adsorption, ion exchange, membrane processes and pH adjustment.
663
Biological Processes for Wastewater Treatment
Specialized biological wastewater treatment processes for removal of impurities not effectively removed by conventional secondary wastewater treatment systems, such as nutrients (e.g. nitrogen and phosphorus), residual organics, residual solids, bacteria and viruses. Wetlands. Activated sludge modelling. Biological nutrient removal. Sludge management. Disinfection.
665
Wastewater Issues for the Oil and Gas Industry
Produced water characteristics, regulations governing produced water management, management options. Technologies used for produced water treatment, novel/emerging technologies. Process design approaches and comparative evaluation of various technologies. Case Studies.
671
Energy and Environment
Introduction to formation, extraction, transportation and conversion of fossil fuels; electricity generation, transmission and distribution; thermal power and cogeneration; nuclear power; renewable energy sources; energy efficiency and conservation; exergy analysis; greenhouse gas emissions; air, land and water pollution and their mitigation.
673
Thermal Systems Analysis
Fundamentals of thermodynamics, fluid mechanics and heat transfer; thermal and energy systems, heat exchangers, co-generation; Second law of thermodynamics and concept of entropy generation and thermo-economics; Environmental issues and pollution control; Renewable energy system; Co-generation design; Heat exchanger design; Energy storage systems; Optimization process.
681
Project in Environmental Engineering I
Allows course-based MEng degree students with the opportunity of pursuing advanced studies or a design project in environmental engineering under the direction of one or more faculty members, which must be arranged and approved prior to registration. A written proposal, progress reports, and a final report are required.
682
Project in Environmental Engineering II
Allows course-based MEng degree students with the opportunity to work on a comprehensive research or design project under the supervision of one or more faculty members, which must be arranged and approved prior to registration. A written proposal, progress reports, and a final report are required.
691
Environmental Policy Analysis
An examination of the policy tools used in decision-making related to the environment, the course aims to facilitate dialogue between political scientists and engineers. Topics include: risk analysis; decision analysis; uncertainty assessment; and benefit-cost analysis. The structure and evolution of environmental regulation will be used as a theme with an emphasis on energy.
693
Life Cycle Assessment
Concepts of life cycle assessment. Consideration of environmental and economic impacts from the extraction of resources to the disposal of unwanted residuals. Review and evaluation of tools and frameworks (e.g. process, input-output, hybrid life cycle assessment). Relative merits of various methods for interpreting and valuing the impacts. Examples of applications in environmental engineering and the energy industry.
Environmental Science
7
201
Introduction to Environmental Science
Topical issues in environmental science including climate change, aquatic systems, agriculture, forestry, mining, energy, endangered species, and protected areas contextualized within the framework of law, policy, economics, sustainability, and the precautionary principle.
401
Environmental Science Field Course I
An introduction to the common field techniques in quantifying air, land and water quality, as well as data analysis and report writing. A field portion is held in the two weeks prior to the start of the regular Fall Term, partly based at the Biogeoscience Institute’s Barrier Lake Field Station.
501
Environmental Science Field Course II
The focus will be on disturbances to aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. Site visits and data collection will be conducted to appropriate areas that have either undergone or are undergoing industrial disturbance to assess impacts. The course is held for two weeks immediately prior to the start of the regular Fall Term.
502
Special Problems in Environmental Management
Aspects of the professional practice of environmental science including environmental management and assessment, sustainability, life cycle assessment, remediation/reclamation technologies, law and regulations, ethics, philosophy and communication. Includes a major collaborative research project on a local environmental issue.
503
Environmental Assessment and Hearings

504
Research Project in Environmental Science
An independent study or research project under the supervision of one or more faculty members in the Environmental Science program. Originality is emphasized and laboratory and/or field studies are encouraged. Formal written and oral reports will be presented as a necessary component of this course.
505
Special Problems in Environmental Science
A research project under the supervision of one or more faculty members in the Environmental Science program. Formal written and oral reports will be presented as a necessary component of this course.
Film
24
201
Introduction to Film Studies

203
Introduction to Research in Film Studies
An in-depth introduction to conducting research in film studies, emphasizing critical viewing, reading and writing through the examination of a specific topic, such as a film genre, a national cinema, or a filmmaker.
301
Topics in National Cinema
Topics will explore various aspects of, or historical moments in, a particular nation's cinematic culture. Topics might include Quebecois cinema, current British cinema, German cinema Between the Wars, Canadian cinema, the History of Chinese cinema, etc.
305
Topics in Genre
Topics will focus on the style, narrative form, and historical evolution of selected genres, for example, the Documentary, the Western, the Melodrama, the Musical, etc.
307
Topics in Cinema and Gender Studies
Topics will explore the representation of gender and sexuality in cinema. Topics might include: Images of Women in the American 1940s, Lesbian Images in Current Cinema, The Queer 1950s, Comparative Images of Women in American and French Cinema, etc.
321
History of Popular Cinema
An assessment of the various ways in which the history of film production can be approached, including the development of filmmaking technologies, evolutions in cinematic style and narrative traditions, particularly as they relate to popular cinema, and changing industrial practices.
323
Issues in Film History
An introduction to key concepts in cinematic historiography. Emphasis will be placed upon non-traditional or non-canonical films and their relationship to dominant histories of filmmaking.
331
Film Theory up to 1950
An introduction to theoretical perspectives on film before the mid-twentieth century. Connects film with broader debates on aesthetics, medium specificity, genre, and realism. Includes theories developed in the first half of the twentieth century related to Silent Film, Formalism, Montage, Critical Theory, and Auteur theories.
333
Film Theory after 1950
An introduction to theoretical perspectives on film developed since the mid-twentieth century, specifically Structuralism, Linguistics, Psychoanalysis, Feminism, Post-structuralism, Cultural Studies, Post-colonialism and Queer Theory.
351
Canadian Film
An introduction to key historical and theoretical aspects of Canadian film. Topics will include the study of Canadian film auteurs, documentary and social change, feature film genres, and the role of government regulations. Explores the central themes and issues facing Canadian filmmakers and audiences.
401
Topics in Film Theory
Topics will be organized around particular theorists, schools of theory, historical issues in film culture, or contemporary thought on film. Topics may include: Psychoanalysis and/as Film Theory; Kaja Silverman and Teresa de Lauretis; Modernism and Post-modernism; Feminist Film Theory; Queer Theory and Film; Post-colonial Theory and Film; Semiotics.
403
Topics in the Director's Cinema
Topics will examine the distinctive style and concerns of a particular director or directors.
405
Advanced Topics in Film Genre
Topics will be organized around a specific film generic tradition.
407
Experiential Learning in Film
Provides the opportunity to combine interests in film studies research with experiential learning opportunities in the community and workplace (internships, paid employment, approved film production training or volunteer position).
409
Special Topics in Film Studies
Topic may be historical, theoretical or analytical in emphasis.
441
The Film Festival
An exploration of the social practices (cultural tourism, tastemaking, identity formation, celebrity and star formation) and operational aspects (marketing, promotion, jurying, lobbying, audience cultivation) of film festivals. Students will be encouraged to participate in community service learning through volunteer opportunities with a particular festival.
451
The Canadian Film Industry: National and Global Perspectives
A study of the nature of the Canadian film industry. Emphasis will be on the evolution of the Canadian motion picture industry in the twentieth century and how it is situated in contemporary popular culture. Other topics include Canada's historic relationship to Hollywood, the audience for Canadian films, the role of the state in funding, distribution and production systems, the impact of new technologies, and how the structure of Canada's film industry compares with those of other countries.
461
Film Audience and Reception
Explores aspects of spectatorship, audience and reception approaches as they intersect with the experience and study of cinema.
471
Experimental Film and Video
Explores the genre of experimental film and video. Particular emphasis will be given to the history and evolution of works in this genre with attention to Canadian contributions and the impact of digital and new media.
501
Research in Selected Topics in Film Studies
Supervised individual study of a special topic.
509
Advanced Special Topics in Film Studies
Selected topic in film studies suitable for advanced studies in the degree. Topic may be historical, theoretical or analytical in emphasis.
591
Senior Seminar in Film Studies
Explores the variety of ways in which film and the technologies of motion pictures connect with social life with reference to a specific topic. Completion of a major project that will integrate understanding of film theory, history and genres.
595
Honours Seminar
Individual research and seminar activities (e.g., critiques, presentations, and peer reviews of drafts) to produce a proposal and a paper to be used as the basis for the honours thesis.
597
Honours Thesis

Finance
36
317
Financial Management

341
Canadian Business Finance
An introduction to business financial management practices in Canada including investment decision, capital markets, and sources, uses and costs of capital over short, intermediate and long run situations.
343
Personal Financial Management
An introduction to personal financial management practices in Canada. Topics discussed may include goal setting, personal financial statements, the mathematics of personal finance, taxation, general and life insurance, retirement planning, investments, and estate planning. Completion of the course should enable students to properly prepare and plan their own financial future.
443
Security Analysis and Investments
A comprehensive exploration of security analysis and investments aimed at advancing understanding of financial markets, risk, arbitrage, market efficiency, portfolio selection, and valuation techniques. Topics such as capital allocation, diversification, risk-assessment, and security (stocks and bonds) valuation are covered.
445
Futures and Options
Extensive introduction to the operation of derivative markets and the valuation of derivative securities. Typical derivatives including forward and future contracts, options, and interest rate derivatives will be covered.
447
Capital Budgeting
Capital investment policies, real options, required rate of return calculation, tax factors, risk analysis, buy versus lease, abandonment considerations.
449
Trading and Market Data Management
Introduction to accessing data feeds as they are used by professional financial market traders and analysts. Data for stock, bond, futures and options markets, accounting statements and securities commission filings, as well as real-time and historical news events and analysis will be studied. Practice trading securities in a simulated environment.
451
Corporate Finance
A deeper understanding of topics such as capital budgeting, capital structure, valuation, payout policy, and financing decisions.
461
International Finance
A study of the forces affecting the financial environment of the corporate sector which appear to stem from requirements in the international sector. Balance-of-payments problems, exchange rates, currency risk hedging techniques, international reserve creations and transfers are some of the major elements studied.
463
Portfolio Theory and Management
Analysis of the major aspects of the grouping of financial assets. Portfolio analysis and its application to portfolio management, capital market theory and the measurement of financial performance in the presence of risk.
465
Mergers and Acquisitions
A study of the economic theory and practical issues around takeover and takeover defence strategies. Valuation issues, corporate restructuring, corporate governance, and methods of ensuring congruence between management and shareholder goals are also discussed.
467
Financial Risk Management
A framework for evaluating financial risks and managing them with the use of financial securities including derivatives. Includes firm valuation with risk management, value-at-risk, testing financial models, optimal hedging strategies, energy risk management, market risk, static versus dynamic strategies, interest rate risk, credit risk and liquidity risk. Case analysis of financial disasters due to risk management failures.
471
The Calgary Portfolio Management Trust
A comprehensive hands-on review of the modern theories and applications of portfolio management. Students will be responsible for completing the fiduciary duties of an actual fund manager, reporting to a Board of Trustees. Topics may include: selecting securities, hedging with covered options, benchmarking a portfolio, financial reporting, evaluation of risk, risk/return trade-offs and management.
473
New Venture Finance
Application of financial theory and analysis to the valuation and financing of new ventures. Course balances learning of concepts, development of analytical skills, and practice in decision making. Opportunity to apply learning to live projects.
475
Management of Financial Institutions
Management of funds and their allocation among cash, primary reserves, loans and investments to provide liquidity and earnings. Services to depositors. Consideration of factors involved in the lending decision, pricing of services, branch location, etc. Strategies for maintaining profitability and liquidity in the face of changing monetary policy.
477
Personal Financial Management in Canada
An introduction to personal financial management in Canada. Topics covered may include goal setting, personal financial statements analysis, the time value of money, the Canadian personal income tax system, taxation issues for small businesses, risk management, an introduction to investments, retirement planning and estate planning. Students will be expected to display a comprehensive knowledge of the tools necessary to complete their own personal financial plan.
479
Corporate Risk Management
Introduction to the management of operational and hazard risks based on contemporary financial theories, including risk identification, loss estimation, risk control, risk financing with insurance and other techniques, and enterprise risk management.
559
Selected Topics in Financial Management
Investigation of selected topics related to financial management, emphasizing the application of financial management principles to actual problems in the corporate sector.
601
Managerial Finance
The major decision-making areas confronting modern financial managers today. Provides a general understanding of financial markets and how they can be used for personal finance. Covers traditional subjects such as capital budgeting, net present value, risk/return, capital structure and dividend policy. Topical areas covered are IPOs, mergers and acquisitions, derivatives and options. The course is integrated with current events from the financial world.
672
Introduction to Finance
Covers the basic analytical tools and theoretical foundations for financial decisions. Topics include: financial markets and instruments, time value of money, valuation of assets and projects under certainty and uncertainty, corporate financing policy and financial risk management.
674
Special Topics in Finance
Introduction to modern financial tools which may include: entrepreneurial finance, investment management, financial institutions, mergers and acquisitions, capital raising and investment banking. Some of the sub-topics will include: blockchain and bitcoin, equity crowdfunding and peer-to-peer lending, robo-dash advisors, big data in finance and early-stage financing.
737
Finance and Governance for Managers
Introduction to basic and advanced concepts of financial management, and application of the tools of financial analysis from the standpoint of the CEO and C-level executives. Topics include ratio analysis, risk concepts, valuation principles, capital budgeting, cost of capital, interest rates, time value of money, leverage, capital structure, dividend policy, financial instruments, working capital management, short- and long-term financing, mergers and acquisitions, and long-range financial planning. The relationship between financial policy and corporate strategy is examined. The broad framework of corporate governance, including incentive structures, monitoring systems, agency problems, payout policies, capital structure, board and ownership structure, executive compensation and corporate control is also covered, with a special focus on accounting and auditing as corporate governance devices.
745
Futures and Options
After presenting basic definitions, institutional details, and strategies, a general theory of derivative pricing based on the principle of No Arbitrage will be developed. This theory will then be applied to the basic derivative contracts (futures, forwards, put options and call option) as well as exotic options. Using the binomial model, as well as the continuous time model of Black Scholes, hedging and replication will also be examined.
751
Advanced Topics in Financial Administration
Classical and contemporary topics in the theory and practice of financial management including capital structure, cost of capital, real options valuation, bankruptcy costs and debt holder-equity holder conflicts, corporate financial strategy, managerial incentives and financial decisions, information conveyed by financial decisions, and mergers and acquisitions.
753
Problems in Financial Management
The application of financial management principles to real-world problems in the corporate sector, including such areas as working capital management, project financing, debt vs. equity financing, payout policy and reorganization.
755
Capital Budgeting
Capital investment policies, real options, required rate of return calculation, tax factors, risk analysis, buy versus lease, abandonment considerations.
757
Management of Financial Institutions
Financial intermediaries such as banking and brokerage. Explains the risks faced by institutions and the integration through modern financial markets. Covers issues such as lending, trading, securitization, deposit insurance and the regulatory environment. Concludes with modern bank management from the shareholder value point of view.
759
Investment and Portfolio Management
Theory and analysis of investment and portfolio management decisions. Main topics include capital allocation, diversification, risk-assessment, and security (stocks and bonds) valuation.
765
Mergers and Acquisitions
A study of economic theory and practical issues around takeover strategies, and takeover defence strategies. Valuation issues, corporate restructuring, corporate governance, and methods of ensuring congruence between management and shareholder goals are also discussed.
767
Financial Risk Management
A framework for evaluating financial risks and managing them with the use of financial securities including derivatives.  Includes firm valuation with risk management, value-at-risk, testing financial models, optimal hedging strategies, energy risk management, market risk, static versus dynamic strategies, interest rate risk, credit risk and liquidity risk.  Case analysis of financial disasters due to risk management failures.
777
Personal Financial Management in Canada
Introduction to personal financial management in Canada. Goal setting, personal financial statements analysis, the time value of money, the Canadian personal income tax system, taxation issues for small businesses, risk management, an overview of investments, retirement planning and estate planning. Completion of a personal financial plan by the end of the course.
785
New Venture Finance
Problems of valuing and financing new ventures. Emphasis on financial theory, best practices and modelling of new ventures. Case studies and opportunities to develop detailed financial plan for live new venture.
789
Seminar in Financial Management
Intensive study and discussion of current literature and research with respect to selected, advanced topics in Finance.
795
International Finance
A study of the international financial environment and the issues firms face when operating in this environment. Currency regimes, currency crises, balance of payments, exchange rate and interest rate parity conditions, supernational agencies, political risks, management of foreign exchange exposure are some of the major topics studied.
797
Advanced Seminar in Finance

799
Doctoral Seminars in Finance

Fine Arts
1
601
Studies at the Banff Centre
Interdisciplinary fine arts studies. Although the Banff Centre does not provide credit course instruction, students with advanced experience in art, dance, drama or music at the Banff Centre may apply for graduate-level credit from the University of Calgary.
French
44
209
Beginners' French I
Basic elements of the French language, including training in comprehension, speaking, reading and writing of French.
211
Beginners' French II

213
Intermediate French
Further development of abilities in spoken and written French. Review of French grammar along with extensive oral and written practice.
225
La Grammaire par les textes I
Apprentissage des structures grammaticales et logiques du français contemporain avec lectures de morceaux choisis de textes de la francophonie mondiale.
227
La Grammaire par les textes II

291
Francophonie: Langue et Culture I
Étude de la langue et de la culture des pays francophones, y compris la France, le Canada et les pays de l’Afrique, de l’Asie et des Caraïbes. Introduction aux sources et aux outils de recherche nécessaires pour cette étude et pour la production de travaux écrits et oraux.
329
Expression écrite et orale
Grammaire avancée. Perfectionnement de techniques d’expression écrite et orale. Introduction à la recherche.
339
Concepts littéraires
Concepts fondamentaux de l'analyse littéraire. L'accent sera placé principalement sur les traditions littéraires des pays francophones. Initiation à l'utilisation de sources bibliographiques particulières à l'étude de la littérature de langue française.
343
Cinéma de langue française
Introduction à l'analyse de films en français.
353
Histoire littéraire
Aperçu chronologique des périodes, mouvements et écoles des littératures de langue française, accompagné d’études de textes.
369
Introduction à la linguistique française
Initiation à l'approche scientifique (objective et systématique) du langage humain. Fonctions du langage et rôle des linguistes. Concepts de base de la linguistique: langage, langue, parole; synchronie vs diachronie; signifiant vs signifié; paradigmatique vs syntagmatique; double articulation; phonèmes, monèmes. Différents domaines de la linguistique.
391
Francophonie: langue et culture II
Étude de la langue française et de la culture des pays de la francophonie: France, Canada, pays d’Afrique, des Caraïbes et d’Asie. Recherche documentaire et production de textes écrits.
393
Français professionnel

399
Langue française, littérature et culture

439
Le Canada francophone
Panorama de la littérature canadienne de langue française.
449
Littératures francophones
Panorama des productions littéraires de langue française en Afrique, au Maghreb et aux Antilles.
453
Littérature du Moyen-Âge et de la Renaissance
Panorama de la littérature française du Moyen-Âge et de la Renaissance.
455
Littérature du XVIIe siècle

457
Littérature du XVIIIe siècle

459
Littérature du XIXe siècle

463
Littérature des XXe-XXIe siècles

489
Aspects de la linguistique française

499
Langue française, littérature et culture II
Étude des aspects de la langue française, de la littérature et de la culture. Les thèmes de ce cours seront abordés à l'aide de méthodes novatrices.
511
Théories critiques
Présentation de certaines théories contemporaines qui ont cours en études littéraires et culturelles. Le format et le contenu peuvent varier d'une année à l'autre.
525
Études indépendantes: apprentissage expérientiel
Stage de recherche sous la direction de professeurs du Département ou stage en milieu francophone. Rapport de fin de stage rédigé en français.
539
Étude spécialisée du Canada français
Séminaire sur des sujets avancés dans le domaine de la langue, de la littérature ou de la culture du Canada français. Le format et le contenu peuvent varier d'une année à l'autre.
543
Étude spécialisée du Cinéma de langue française
Séminaire sur des sujets avancés ayant trait au cinéma de langue française. Le format et le contenu peuvent varier d'une année à l'autre.
549
Étude spécialisée de la francophonie
Séminaire sur des sujets avancés ayant trait à la langue, aux littératures ou aux diverses cultures de la francophonie. Le format et le contenu peuvent varier d'une année à l'autre.
565
Étude spécialisée de littérature française
Séminaire sur des sujets avancés ayant trait à la littérature française. Le format et le contenu peuvent varier d'une année à l'autre.
579
Étude spécialisée de linguistique française
Séminaire sur des sujets avancés dans le domaine de la linguistique française. Le format et le contenu peuvent varier d'une année à l'autre.
598
Mémoire de baccalauréat spécialisé

599
Études spécialisées de la langue, de la littérature ou de la culture
Séminaire sur des questions d'actualité ayant trait à la langue, à la littérature ou à la culture au sens large. Exemples de sujets traités: l’histoire des idées, la littérature française du Moyen-Âge, l'autobiographie, l'écriture des femmes de langue française, le créole dans les écrits de langue française, etc. Le format et le contenu peuvent varier d’une année à l’autre.
605
Problématiques littéraires

609
Problématiques linguistiques

625
Études cinématographiques

635
Le texte narratif

637
Études théâtrales

639
Poésie de langue française

655
Francophonies

675
Féminismes et Gender

685
Voix québécoises et canadiennes

689
Arts et Cultures

691
Autour d'un auteur

695
Profession et recherche

Geography
84
204
Global Environmental Change
Examination of current environmental issues related to physical geography, including topics such as climate change, energy and sustainable resource development, weather extremes, and natural hazards. The course uses contemporary topics to introduce fundamental principles of physical and environmental geography while highlighting societal impacts and influences.
254
Society and Environment
Foundations of human geography presented with integrative case studies of current and urgent human-environment issues from global to regional to local. Examines the complex interconnections between humans and environment using topics such as climate change, sustainability, development, poverty, food, urbanization, and technologies of the digital age.
280
Thinking Spatially in a Digital World
Introduces mapping technologies and digital spatial data for solving geographical problems that focus on how to collect, manage, analyze, and communicate diverse spatial data. Topics include geographic information systems (GIS), remote sensing, spatial statistics, geovisualization, cartography, and web mapping.
308
Climate and Ecosystems
Introduction to the Earth’s atmospheric environment (elements and controls of climate and their implications for hydrology, vegetation, and soils) and the nature and distribution of ecosystems and vegetation. Incorporates interactions between humans and their environment, especially those leading to global change on the decade to century time-scale.
310
Landforms and Soils
Introduction to physical landscapes and soils, emphasizing the formation and geographic distribution of mountains, volcanoes, valleys, and deserts, and their shaping by rivers and glaciers; and the fundamental concepts in soil science. Incorporates human modification of the Earth’s surface.
324
Society and Environmental Change
Environmental and resource issues, with emphasis on topics such as climate change, sustainability, ethics, planning, policy and decision making, and management strategies. Case examples highlight issues in resource sectors such as freshwater, oceans, parks and wildlife, tourism and recreation, forests and energy.
326
Geographies of Canada
Exploration of what it means to be Canadian in a global context. Examination of the historic, cultural, social, political, economic, and environmental factors that promote unity and inter-regional tensions.
328
Geographies of East and Southeast Asia
An introduction to the geographies of East and Southeast Asia utilizing the foundations of physical and human geography. The logical divisions based on culture, physiography, history, migration, social and economic both currently and historically. Issues of development and the environmental impacts relating to rapid growth, urbanization, and intensive use of resources will be addressed.
330
Geographies of Europe
An introduction to the geographies of Europe utilizing the foundations of physical and human geography. The logical divisions based on culture, physiography, history, migration, social, and economy will be explored both currently and historically. Settlement patterns, transportation networks, economic activities, and contrasting cultural, ethnic, linguistic and religious variations will be emphasized.
352
Political, Economic, and Urban Geography
A introduction to the major concepts of human geography including political geography, economic geography, the uneven distribution of development across the surface of the Earth, and the urbanization of the developed and developing world.
354
Social and Cultural Geography
An introduction to the major concepts of human geography including demography, migration, cultures, languages, and religions.
380
Geospatial Communication
An introduction to fundamentals in cartography, remote sensing, geographic information systems, and descriptive spatial statistics.
390
International Field Studies
An introduction to conducting international reconnaissance research in geography. Provides a background in various aspects of ethical research practices, qualitative and quantitative data collection, analysis, and dissemination.
391
Geographic Field Studies
An introduction to field research techniques and topics in physical and human geography. Lectures and projects will provide an introduction to a range of geographic disciplines. Field exercises will normally be conducted away from Calgary for about ten days before Fall Term.
408
Meteorology and Hydrology
Atmospheric connections with the hydrological cycle, including evapotranspiration, water vapour, stability, cloud development, and precipitation. Water transport is followed through soil moisture, groundwater, and stream flow. Discussed methods focus on tracking water transport through the land-atmosphere system at various scales. Additional topics may include water quality, water resource management, and hydrology of selected landscapes.
410
Process Geomorphology
A systematic study of the physical processes that shape the Earth's surface. Emphasis is on the mechanics of geomorphic processes and their interaction with Earth materials.
412
Soil Science
Exploration of soil science including the chemical, physical, and biological properties of soils; soil formation and development, including the classification of soils, and the application of soil science to land use, environmental quality, global change, and sustainable development.
426
Climate Change and Society
Overview of social dimensions of climate change. Addresses representation, governance, knowledge production, power and justice. Examines how responses and policies are shaped across various scales including global, national, regional, urban and individual.
428
Sustainability and Political Ecology
Exploration of the challenges associated with environmental management and governance, particularly in terms of achieving sustainability. Emphasis is placed on ongoing local, regional, and global environmental problems, using political ecology perspectives to understand power, discourse and interest mechanisms behind environmental rights, controls, and sustainability needs.
430
Animal Geography
Explores the socio-spatial relationships between humans and animals, with the goal of elucidating the ecological, economic, political, social, and cultural pressures shaping these relations, and the conflicts arising from human-animal interactions. Inter-species bonds and emotional lives of animals are also covered.
432
Global Change and Hazards
Examination of the factors that influence vulnerability and resiliency to environmental hazards. Emphasis on how human activities change both the dynamics of natural processes and the spatio-temporal variability of vulnerability and resiliency.
434
Field Studies in Social and Economic Geography
Field research and reconnaissance survey techniques. Individual and group travel-study combined with formal instruction and seminars.
436
Field Studies in Physical and Environmental Geography
Field research and reconnaissance survey techniques. Individual and group travel-study combined with formal instruction and seminars.
452
Urban Social Geography
Concepts of urban geography with particular reference to intra-urban social issues.
454
Economic Geography
Theories, concepts and techniques of economic geography with emphasis on policy issues relating to examples at the urban, regional, and national levels.
456
Uneven Development
Foundations of development geography and its concern with multiscalar, multidimensional processes of intervention and change. Focus on urban-rural and global-local change effects and human settlement. An interrogation of globalization, poverty, marginality, human settlement and the diversity of development actors, the state, the aid community, and the people directly affected by development.
458
Political Geographies
Spatial study of political systems, structures, and processes, and their relationship to geographic factors.
480
Cartography and Geovisualization
Focuses on mapping technologies for cartography and geo-visualization. The role of cartography and geovisualization is explored both theoretically, and practically in the communication of spatial data. In lecture and lab-based settings, examines data considerations, map design fundamentals and techniques, map use and interactive design for the communication of geographic information.
482
Geographic Information Systems and Science
The technical and theoretical foundations of Geographic Information Science. Explorations of data types and structures, data integrity, metadata, data acquisition and maintenance, analytical techniques, and methods for geovisualization will be explored in lecture and laboratory.
483
Ways of Knowing in Geography
Conceptualizing human-environment realities into research: an introduction to philosophical foundations of ways of thinking and critical perspectives; qualitative and mixed methods approaches. Examination of 'rules' of research and the challenges of real world complexities. In-depth examples of human-environment research from theory to practice, broad research design and proposal writing practice.
484
Remote Sensing Essentials
Instruction in the background, use and interpretation of remote sensing imagery. Labs and topics introduce fundamental principles of raster-based image analysis, visualization and classification. Labs will include identification, interpretation and mapping of both physical and cultural landscape features.
485
Quantitative Analysis
Introduction to quantitative research methodology, sampling and survey design in geography. Covers the background analytical techniques for an understanding of geographic literature. Examples will involve the use of statistical computer packages.
500
Critical Zone Science
Examination of the Critical Zone, Earth's outer layer that extends from the top of vegetation to the bottom of the fresh groundwater zone. It is a constantly evolving boundary layer where rock, soil, water, air, and living organisms interact to regulate the landscape and natural habitats, and determine the availability of life-sustaining resources, including our food production and water quality.
502
Arctic Systems Science
Investigates the Arctic as a coupled system, and how the Arctic interacts with other Earth systems. Draws on physical, chemical, and biological sciences to understand linked topics such as Arctic glaciers, marine environments, hydrology, permafrost, wildlife, vegetation, and sea ice. Particular focus is paid to cycles of carbon, water, and energy as key drivers of the Arctic system. Selected human interactions with the Arctic system are also examined.
503
Climate Change
Overview of global climate dynamics and the interactions between ocean, atmosphere, biosphere, cryosphere, and biogeochemical cycles. Examination of climate change in Earth's past, present, and future, scrutinizing both natural and anthropogenic influences on the global climate system.
504
Oceanography
Physical ocean processes including circulation, waves, and tides are examined as part of the Earth’s climate system. These physical processes are then linked to controls on primary production in the ocean, and marine foodwebs/ecosystems. Chemical processes driven by circulation and biology are examined, with a focus on marine feedbacks related to past and present climate change.
506
Wind Science
Physical laws governing wind processes in the upper atmosphere and the planetary boundary layer. Topics include: global wind patterns, boundary layer wind flow, pollution, wind energy, wind erosion, and wind storms.
510
Biogeography and Landscape Ecology
Explores the distribution (past and present) of animals and plants, causes of variation in species types, and their abundance and survival. Topics focus on bioregions, biodiversity, communities, ecosystems at multiple scales, as well as investigation of ways that human and natural disturbance affect these patterns. Uses qualitative and quantitative approaches to measure these effects to inform management and conservation.
512
Advanced Field Methods
Focuses on field data collection and laboratory and computational analysis techniques practiced by physical geographers. Students will conduct an integrated analysis of a local landscape, including site selection, sample collection, lab analysis, and data assimilation and interpretation for report writing. Approximately one-half of the course is taught outdoors.
526
Urban Political Ecology
Urban political ecology helps to untangle the interconnected economic, political, social, and ecological processes that together form highly uneven urban landscapes. Through theoretical and case study articles, discussions of themes such as water, food, green space, housing, waste, and through local case-studies, students will examine the evolution of urban political ecology, its main tenets and its relevance for understanding urbanization processes.
528
Development and Participation
Critical engagement with development studies, with emphasis on local populations as development subjects, actors and potential agents of change. Opportunities and limitations of participation as development paradigm, methodology and practice are addressed in diverse problem settings to interrogate the multi-dimensional challenges of development for sustainability.
530
Environmental Governance and Conflict
Foundations of environmental governance, management and discourse research from literature to practice, paired with case-specific applications on the changing roles of global, local and online spheres in today’s environmental conflicts. Examples include global conservation, international climate change negotiations, carbon forests, environmental services, indigenous movements, renewable technologies, oil and gas conflicts, ecotourism, rural marginalization, and international environmental action strategies.
532
Science, Technology, and Society
Seminar-style overview of core readings, key concepts and central debates in science, technology and society (STS) in Geography. Considers mutual shaping of science, technology and society as context-dependent practices involving institutions and discourses that vary across regions and time. Themes include social construction of knowledge and technology, agency, networks, co-production, expertise, authority, legitimacy, and democratic engagement. Empirical cases at global, national, and regional scales illustrate key concepts and debates.
534
Geographies of Food
Explores geographies of food on different scales – from the global to the local – with an emphasis on links between urban and rural contexts. By applying diverse perspectives (ecology, economy, equity, culture, policy, politics, gender, justice etc.) and normative concepts such as food sovereignty, we learn about the current globalized industrial agri-food regime as well as alternative and sustainable food systems.
536
Environment and Behaviour
An approach to human geography that attempts to understand human activity in space, place, time, and the environment through the lens of the individual. Focus on how humans perceive the environment around them in both perceptual, cognitive, physical and behavioural terms, and how they use this information when making judgments and choices that lead to spatial behaviour.
538
Tourism, Parks and Protected Areas
Interdisciplinary perspectives that directly influence policy, planning, and management of nature-based parks and protected areas. Examines the evolving social, economic, political and environmental aspects of parks and protected areas and considers current management challenges.
553
Globalization and the City
Introduction to the social, cultural, political and economic forces operating on a global scale that increasingly shape the dynamics of cities. Emphasis is placed on social and cultural hybridity, translocal interaction, geographies of social and economic polarization, and the scalar politics and regulation of globalization.
554
Social Movements, Possible Worlds
How urban social movements arise in the context of broader urban and societal processes. The geographical strategies and social, cultural, and political grievances of urban social movements are examined in a variety of contexts around the world.
558
Urban and Regional Political Economy
A critical review of the geographical principles of urban growth and uneven development in the context of local, regional and global urban systems. Topics may include urbanization processes under capitalism, city-regions, global city networks, returns to urban agglomeration, inter-spatial competition, and transnational movements of capital and labour.
565
Spaces of Urban Politics
An examination of how urban spatial relations shape, and are shaped by, political institutions, organizations, and social movements. Themes may include the politics of urban growth, urban environmental justice, urban sustainability, place-based politics, and multi-scalar politics.
567
Introduction to Programming in Geographic Information Systems
Introduction to computer programming for customizing and automating a GIS. Topics include object-oriented programming techniques, advanced geoprocessing, scripting, and automation using a programming language such as Python or Visual Basic.
582
Technology, Society, and Space
Explores the relationship between spatial technologies and social/political systems. Examines the ways geographers have made sense of the social construction and societal implications of technologies across time and place.
583
Advanced Qualitative Methods
Exploration of the underlying theories and procedures of qualitative research, in human geography. Overview of methodologies including conventional approaches such as case studies and ethnographies and critical avenues such as feminist, indigenous and science and technology studies approaches. Main qualitative research methods (interviews, discourse analysis, observation, action-oriented research) are covered.
584
Advanced Remote Sensing
Advanced remote sensing topics and labs (e.g., Geographic Object Based Image Analysis (GEOBIA), LiDAR, Urban Heat Islands, microwave remote sensing, etc.). Students will develop a remote sensing project with potential to result in a commercial remote sensing product/service and formally present their ideas (in class) as if they were presenting to their business manager/supervisor.
585
Multivariate Statistics
Methods for the analysis of temporal, spatial and multivariate data sets. Emphasis is placed on data sets relating to geographic phenomena, resource utilization and environmental problems, with examples from the geographic literature. Examples will involve the use of computer packages.
586
Web Mapping and Internet GIS
Explores and practices theoretical and applied concepts related to online mapping. Covers advantages and techniques for publishing, visualizing and accessing maps and data on the Internet. Develops web mapping applications including static and interactive platforms.
587
Geospatial Project Management
Capstone course applying the broad methodological training from GIS, remote sensing, cartography, qualitative and quantitative methods. Collaborative research and project management is stressed.
588
Urban GIS
Surveys GIS applications for urban studies, and the data structures, sources, and analysis techniques used in them. Explores urban spatial analysis, decision-making in a GIS environment, and representational challenges, including project planning, spatial data acquisition, data preparation and coding, analysis and visualization of project findings, and communication and implementation of project results.
595
Honours Thesis Research
Initiation of an individual research project and preparation leading to an Honours thesis under the supervision of a faculty member.
596
Directed Independent Study
Advanced study of a particular topic under the direct supervision of a faculty member.
597
Advanced Topics in Human Geography
An examination of selected topics in Human Geography in a seminar format.
598
Honours Thesis
Continuation of supervised individual research and completion of an Honours thesis under the supervision of a faculty member. A public presentation of the thesis is expected.
599
Advanced Topics in Physical Geography
An examination of selected topics in Physical Geography in a seminar format.
601
Graduate Research Seminar
Presentation and evaluation of graduate research seminars.
603
Remote Sensing: Basics and Beyond
Introduction to the theory and practice of remote sensing. Topics include physics of remote sensing, sensor systems, resolutions, geometric and radiometric correction, image analysis (enhancements, filtering, texture analysis, principal components, classification approaches and algorithms and accuracy). May include specific image acquisition systems and their methodological requirements. Emphasis is on fundamental concepts. Laboratory provides experience with fundamental image processing techniques.
605
Statistical Analysis: Basics and Beyond
Introduction to applied statistics, particularly as they are used in geographical analysis. Topics include sampling design, summary statistics, probability theory, inferential statistics, and multivariate analysis. Laboratory exercises give students hands-on experience in computer-based statistical analysis.
607
Geographic Information Systems: Basics and Beyond
Introduction to the world of Geographic Information Systems (GIS). Includes: representing reality in the digital realm, georeferencing, data structures, software history and comparison, and the full spectrum of analytical approaches associated with advanced GIS software. A major part of the work will be hands on. Software is used as a vehicle for taking the theory and concepts into a working reality.
621
The Politics of Environment
Contemporary issues in environmental conflict, management and governance with case-specific applications from global to local.
633
Research and Applications in Remote Sensing
Review and basic and advanced principles of image analysis. Includes advanced laboratory techniques, integration of remote sensing with GIS, current research in remote sensing, project organization, and data sources for remote sensing.
639
Advanced Spatial Analysis and Modelling
History of spatial modelling in geography; comprehensive coverages of techniques, spatial analysis and spatial modelling as currently used within GIS and remote sensing.
647
Advanced Research and Applications in Geographic Information Systems
Focus on advanced GIS applications in core areas; methodological developments in GIS, and current research directions in GIS.
681
Geographic Information Systems Project: Theoretical Issues

683
Geographic Information Systems Project: Application

685
Arctic System Science
This course investigates the process linkages at various spatiotemporal scales between the atmosphere, lithosphere and hydrosphere operating within high latitude environments of the Northern Hemisphere. Of particular interest is the response of the terrestrial and marine cryosphere to climate variability and change, including methods for its detection and quantification.
687
Advanced Glacial Geomorphic Systems
Contemporary topics in glacial geomorphology and sedimentology. Course consists of lecture, seminar and field trip components.
689
Advanced Topics in Geocryology
Contemporary topics in the science and engineering of seasonally and perennially frozen ground. Course consists of lectures and seminars.
691
Advanced Fluvial Geomorphology
Advanced theory and research issues in fluvial geomorphology. Topics may include flow hydraulics, sediment transport, river morphology, channel networks, sediment routing, drainage basin evolution, and channel response to environmental change.
695
Seminar in Geographic Research Methods

696
Urban, Regional and Global Political Economy Seminar
Spatial and power relations that shape urban, regional and global processes. Investigation of a wide range of processes, ranging in scale from the local to the global: capital investment and disinvestment; state power and policymaking; planning, governance and governmentality; political struggle, all in multiple forms of spatiality: place, scale, territory, networks.
697
Seminar in the Philosophy and Nature of Human Geography

699
Seminar in the Philosophy and Nature of Physical Geography

795
Selected Topics in Geographic Research Methods

797
Selected Topics in Human Geography

799
Selected Topics in Physical Geography

Geology
74
201
Principles of Geoscience
Composition and internal structure of the Earth; surface processes; internal processes and global tectonics; rocks and minerals, topographic and geologic maps.
202
Applications of Geoscience
Applications of geology and geophysics to the study of earthquakes, volcanoes and other geologic hazards; natural resources; environmental management; human impact on the Earth and global change.
209
Introduction to Geology
Basic concepts regarding the major features of Earth; its rock and mineral composition, processes controlling erosion, deposition and surface structures; formation of mountains, ocean basins and continents; internal structure of the Earth and plate tectonics.
297
Topics in Geology
Lectures and study in geological sciences.
301
Geology of the Mountain Regions of Western Canada
Selected topics encountered in introductory physical geology will be pursued in greater depth in order to explain the geology of Western Canadian Mountain Parks and adjacent areas.
305
Introduction to Dinosaurs
Biology, evolution, and extinction of dinosaurs; geographic and temporal distribution, habitats, and ecology of the various dinosaur groups; preservation, exploration, collection, preparation, and identification of dinosaur fossils.
307
Geological History of Life
The history of life from the earliest records to the present. Fossils, geological time, extinction, basic paleontology. The rise and development of various animals and plants including dinosaurs, mammals and humans.
308
Geology and Human Health
An overview of human health issues related to geological phenomena. Examples of possible topics include medical geology, heavy metals in groundwater, effects of volcanic eruptions, effects of asbestos-type minerals, acid mine drainage and soil nutrient deficiencies.
313
Mineralogy
The chemical and physical properties of the common minerals in the context of the common rock types; introduction to crystallography; optical properties of minerals; introduction to mineral associations and rock textures in hand samples and thin sections; introduction to analytical techniques (XRD, electron microprobe, etc.).
323
Geochemical Processes
Focus is on chemical processes taking place in geological settings with emphasis on the abundance relationships of the elements in the Earth and the processes governing the differentiation, migration and distribution of the elements. Discussions include mineral, rock and aqueous chemistry; applications of radiogenic and stable isotopes; thermodynamics and phase diagrams; biogeochemistry and organic geochemistry; analytical techniques; applications and case studies.
333
Igneous, Metamorphic and Ore Rocks and Processes
Origin, identification, classification and interpretation of igneous and metamorphic rocks. Including common rock types, mineral assemblages and textures in hand samples and thin section, volcanic and plutonic processes and conditions, thermo-chemical conditions of metamorphic rock formation, introduction to ore deposits and ore minerals in hand sample, Canadian examples of ore deposits, tectonic settings of igneous, metamorphic and ore rocks.
337
Introduction to Geologic Field Methods
Study of various rock types and sediment exposures focusing on recognition and description of rock types, construction of geological maps and cross-sections and measurement of stratigraphic sections. Field skills will include map interpretation, navigation, and measuring planar and linear features. Field exercises will normally be conducted off campus for about 12-15 days during August before the Fall Term of third year.
343
3D Geologic Structures and Methods
Methods of 3D geologic data collection, manipulation and interpretation. Special emphasis on maps and cross sections and the geometric methods and data types used to understand and work with 3D geologic relationships. Course will emphasize hands-on exercises and teach the application of: geologic maps, subsurface data; relative dating; cross-cutting relations, and 3D visualization of the architecture of geological bodies and surfaces and their relationship to causative processes.
353
Surficial Systems
Overview of the geomorphologic and hydrologic processes that operate on and just beneath the Earth’s surface. Includes hydrology (precipitation, evaporation, soil water, ground water, and their interaction in watersheds), surface processes (erosion, weathering, rivers, glaciers, Quaternary geology, landforms); engineering properties of surface materials; applications (including aggregates and water as resources, geotechnical issues, water quality, etc.).
377
Petroleum Engineering Geology
The principles and methods of physical geology with special emphasis on their application to the exploitation of oil and gas. Laboratory: properties of minerals and rocks, analysis and interpretation of surface and subsurface maps, interpretation of borehole logs and core, properties of sedimentary rocks.
381
Sedimentary Rocks and Processes
Origin, identification, classification and interpretation of sediments, siliciclastic, carbonate and evaporite rocks. Study of sediment/rock components (minerals), fossils and textures in hand sample and thin section; sedimentary structures and processes; introduction to depositional environments; burial, lithification and diagenesis; applications, including introduction to basin analysis/tectonics, exploration for water and petroleum resources, etc.
401
Physical Hydrogeology
Hydrologic cycle, conservation principle, Darcy's Law, groundwater flow systems, aquifer testing, soil hydrology, effective stress, land subsidence, solute transport.
403
Aqueous Geochemistry
Theoretical and applied aspects of aqueous solution chemistry. Topics include: methods for collection and preservation of water samples in the field, laboratory analysis of waters, theory and application of aqueous thermochemical models.
431
Igneous Petrology
Petrogenesis of igneous rocks using field data, geochemistry and experiments. Application of igneous petrology to Earth processes and evolution.
433
Metamorphic Petrology
Petrogenesis of metamorphic rocks. Application of metamorphic petrology to Earth processes and evolution.
435
Field Methods

441
Field Techniques in Hydrogeology

445
Structural Geology
Mechanical principles involved in the deformation of rocks; classification of tectonic structures in stratified and non-stratified rocks; manipulation of structural data and its predictive use. Includes basic kinematics, dynamics, rheology, and descriptive structural geology. Also includes a strong lab component emphasizing 3D problem solving, structural analysis, and the use of geologic data sets to construct geologic cross-sections.
463
Siliciclastic Sedimentology
Depositional and diagenetic facies models applied to main depositional settings for siliciclastic sedimentary rocks, based on both modern and ancient examples. Investigation of the linkages between provenance, deposition, stratigraphic stacking and diagenesis of siliciclastic rocks, and how these factors affect the quality of subsurface fluid reservoirs.
471
Geology, Engineering, and the Environment
The principles and methods of physical geology with special emphasis on their application in dealing with civil engineering and environmental problems. Laboratory: properties of minerals and rocks, analysis and interpretation of geological maps, photogeology and seismic refraction in site investigation problems.
475
The Geological Record of Global Change
Geochemical relationships among the atmosphere, hydrosphere, and lithosphere will be examined. Topics include the carbon cycle, chemical weathering, mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal activity, past changes in seawater chemistry, stable isotopes, climate change.
483
Carbonate Sedimentology
Petrography of carbonate sediments and their biotic and abiotic constituents. Ocean chemistry of carbonate systems and ocean acidification. Sedimentological, biological and climatic significance of modern and ancient carbonates. Warm- and cool-water carbonate factories. Lacustrine, peritidal, neritic, reef, slope, and pelagic environments. Diagenesis, dolomitization and carbonate reservoirs.
493
Evolution of Earth Through Life and Time
Origin and evolution of life within the framework of evolution of continents, oceans and atmosphere. Processes and signature of life.  Concepts and patterns of evolutionary biology/paleobiology, extinctions, and diversity of life forms. Morphology and taxonomy of fossil groups and geological applications.
505
Contaminant Hydrogeology
Chemical and biological processes in surface water and groundwater systems. Topics include: water quality, contaminant transport and dispersal, fluid-sediment interactions, remediation of contamination. Techniques will include the use of thermochemical models, numerical modelling of contaminant migration, and examination of case studies.
509
Independent Study
A written report based on independent study. Originality is emphasized, laboratory and field studies are encouraged.
510
Senior Thesis
A written report based on extensive independent study. Originality is emphasized, laboratory and field studies are encouraged.
523
Advanced Mineralogy
Crystal chemistry of important mineral groups. Relations between structure, property, and composition. Common structure types and their use in understanding complex minerals. Elements of symmetry, space groups, X-ray diffraction techniques, and introduction to crystal structure determination and refinement using experimental data sets and extensive use of computers. Emphasis is on the interpretation and application of results to solving problems in Earth Sciences.
527
Ore Deposits
Processes of formation of metallic ore and diamond ore deposits. Classification of ores based on petrologic association. Introduction to ore microscopy.
535
Early Earth Evolution
Geological evolution in the early stages (Precambrian) of Earth's history including planetary accretion, core formation, evolution of mantle and differentiation of bulk silicate earth, evolution of continental crust and its tectonic mechanisms, evolution of continental mantle lithosphere, evolution of atmosphere and hydrosphere, geologic record of early life, etc. Current geochemical and geodynamic models that attest to these events in the geological record will be explored.
537
Advanced Field Methods
Field study of geological problems using advanced methods. Field exercises will normally be conducted away from Calgary for about 10-12 days.
541
Advanced Structural Geology
Structural features of complexly folded strata; advanced fold and fault analysis; simple statistical analysis of data; structural analysis; applications to exploration and exploitation; cross-sections and balancing; advanced map interpretation; tectonics; neotectonics.
543
Advanced Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology
Advanced study of igneous and/or metamorphic petrology, and integration with structure, geochronology and tectonics. Applications to problems in earth science. Includes use of microscopy and geochemistry, as well as possible application of instrumental methods.
545
Petroleum Geology Field School
Description and analysis of sedimentary rocks in the field with the objective of recognizing and developing analog models for basin- and field-scale subsurface fluid reservoirs. Consideration of the range of factors affecting reservoir quality e.g. depositional settings, stratigraphy, diagenesis, deformation, etc. Field School will normally be conducted away from Calgary for about 10-12 days preceding the Fall Term or following the Winter Term.
555
Global Tectonics
Global aspects of plate tectonics and regional geology through time. Application of fundamental stratigraphic and structural principles. Contributions of geophysics, geochemistry, experimental and theoretical petrology to the modern plate tectonic model. Analysis and interpretation of major structural provinces as they relate to plate boundary interactions.
561
Sequence Stratigraphy
Integrated approach to the study of genetic stratigraphic sequences and their bounding surfaces, linked to facies analysis of clastic and carbonate successions. Principles of sequence stratigraphy and applications to petroleum reservoirs.
571
Engineering Geology
The role of geology in engineering problems. Characterization of rock, rock masses and soil. Mechanical behaviour of geologic material. Investigation methods and case histories.
577
Introduction to Petroleum Geology
Fundamental concepts of petroleum geology from deposition/maturation of source rocks to hydrocarbon generation, migrate on and accumulation. Principles of hydrocarbon production, introduction to techniques of subsurface geological analysis applied to the evaluation and quantification of oil and gas reservoirs.
579
Basin Analysis
Origin of basin subsidence, basin fills and petroleum systems. Basins in their geodynamic environment. Physical state of the lithosphere. Basins due to lithospheric stretching, flexure, and strike-slip deformation. Effects of mantle dynamics. Sediment provenance and routing system. Basin stratigraphy. Subsidence and thermal history. Petroleum basins from around the world.
581
Advanced Petroleum Geology
Principles and applications of the characterization of petroleum systems, reservoirs and their fluids with a focus on unconventional resources. Methods of reservoir characterization, log analysis, subsurface mapping and the evaluation of reservoir heterogeneity with respect to geological characteristics and fundamental fluid flow related reservoir and fluid properties. Also examines subsurface CO2 storage and other routes to eliminating CO2 emissions from fossil fuel use as well as looking at the role of geoscience in energy recovery innovation and technology development.
587
Invertebrate Paleobiology
Advanced study of selected groups of invertebrate fossil groups, micro- and macrofossils, with extensive presentation of various aspects related to morphology, fossilization, taxonomy, classification, biostratigraphical distribution, evolution, extinction, and industry applications. The lab component includes direct study on each of the fossil groups and advanced biostratigraphy exercises.
597
Geostatistics
Statistical analysis of spatial data, multivariate data analysis, regression, variogram analysis, kriging, co-kriging and stochastic simulation.
599
Contemporary Topics in Geology
Courses are offered in contemporary topics in areas such as geochemistry, hydrogeology, mineralogy, paleontology, petroleum geology, petrology, quantitative geology, sedimentology, structural geology, and surficial geology.
601
Advanced Physical Hydrogeology

602
Advanced Aqueous Geochemistry and Environmental Microbiology
An advanced treatment of Aqueous Geochemistry and Environmental Microbiology.
605
Groundwater Flow and Transport Modelling
Review of the partial differential equations and boundary conditions that describe groundwater flow and transport. Introduction to numerical methods. The course emphasizes the practical aspects of building groundwater and transport models using computer exercises and a groundwater modelling project.
607
Advanced Physical Hydrology
Coverage of more advanced topics in the physical hydrology of surface and subsurface waters including land-atmosphere exchange, vadose zone processes, and watershed hydrology.
609
Advanced Contaminant Hydrogeology

611
Groundwater Resource Management
Advanced topics related to groundwater resource development and management, including exploration methods, aquifer test analysis, aquifer-aquitard systems, groundwater recharge, and the role of models. Fundamental issues related to regional integrated management of water resources.
615
Advanced Laboratory Methods in Geoscience
An overview of analytical methods (XRD, SEM, FESEM, EPMA, XRF, ICP-MS, MS, organic geochemical analyses, etc.) in geoscience and their applications. The course will provide the theoretical background of the techniques as well as opportunities for practical experience. Particular emphasis will be placed on analytical techniques available within the department.
623
Modern Diffraction and Scattering Techniques
Space groups and principles of X-ray, neutron, and electron diffraction and their applications. Crystal structure determination and refinement using single crystal and Rietveld methods. X-ray and neutron scattering techniques (using the Pair Distribution Function, PDF) to examine local disorder in nano-materials and glasses. Phase transition and structural evolution with pressure, temperature, and composition. Analyses of experimental data sets and extensive use of computers.
633
Advanced Petrologic Methods
Theoretical and applied problems in petrology, including some or all of: numerical techniques in petrology, phase equilibria, geothermometry and geobarometry, kinetics in petrology, physics and chemistry of magmatic processes. Laboratory will consist of petrographic study of rock suites.
637
Advanced Geoscience Field Studies
Application of advanced concepts and/or methods to field problems of current interest.
639
Field Laboratory in Groundwater Hydrogeology

641
Advanced Structural Methods
Analysis of mesoscopic and megascopic structural data; the construction and analytical use of cross-sections, subsurface maps and 3-dimensional models; structural analysis of the Canadian Cordillera.
647
Geology Well Log Applications
Geological applications of petrophysical well logs and integration with core descriptions and core analysis data. Derivation of reservoir properties from single-well and multi-well studies.
655
Unconventional Gas Reservoir Characterization and Evaluation
Overview of the unique storage and production mechanisms associated with coalbed methane, tight gas and shale gas reservoirs; adsorbed gas storage and modelling; gas-in-place determination and volumetric reserves estimation; material balance techniques; fracture and matrix flow mechanisms; completion/stimulation methods; reservoir characterization methods including core analysis, rate-transient and pressure-transient analysis; exploration and development concepts.
660
Advanced Sequence Stratigraphy
Concepts and application of sequence stratigraphy to seismic, outcrops, cores, and well logs, with a focus on siliciclastic depositional systems.
663
Applications of Stable Isotopes
Application of stable isotope techniques with special focus on Hydrogeology, Geology and Environmental Sciences. The use of isotopes to understand the water, carbon, nitrogen and sulphur cycles is demonstrated. Topics include hydrology, paleoclimates, geothermometry, fossil fuels exploration and recovery, pollutant tracing, food webs, forensic investigations, among others.
675
Advanced Topics in Dinosaur Paleontology
Topics related to the paleobiology, paleoecology, and paleoenvironments of the Dinosauria will be covered.
683
Advanced Carbonate Sedimentology
Advanced coverage of carbonate sedimentology, including the origin of carbonate sediments, modern and ancient, and their depositional and diagenetic environments.
691
Geological Applications of Well Logs
Geological applications of petrophysical well logs and integration with core descriptions and core analysis data. Derivation of reservoir properties from single-well and multi-well studies.
697
Advanced Geostatistics

698
Reservoir Characterization for Field Development
A team-based, integrated reservoir description experience working with geophysical, geological, petrophysical, and engineering data to produce a field development plan.
699
Selected Topics in Geology
Courses are offered in specific topics in areas such as geochemistry, hydrogeology, mineralogy, paleontology, petroleum geology, petrology, quantitative geology, sedimentology, structural geology, and surficial geology.
701
Advanced Independent Study
A written report based on laboratory and field studies is required.
703
Readings in Geology
A written report based on a literature review is required.
705
Graduate Skills in Geoscience
Provides incoming graduate students with an overview of professional skills that are key to success in graduate school and beyond. Presentation skills, writing scientific manuscripts, the peer review process, defence and candidacy exams, intellectual property and innovation, and networking basics.
707
Geology and Geophysics of Western Canada
Topics include stratigraphy, sedimentology, structure, petrology, geophysics and economic geology. Laboratories contain a field component.
733
Analytical Methods in Petrology
Topics may include scanning electron microscope, electron probe, X-ray diffraction and X-ray fluorescence.
Geomatics Engineering
54
319
Introduction to Probability, Statistics, and Estimation
Presentation and description of data, introduction to probability theory, Bayes' theorem, discrete and continuous probability distributions. Theory of errors and adjustment of observations. Familiarization with geomatics engineering methodology and estimation. The least squares method for linear parametric and conditional models.
327
Spectral Analysis in Geomatics
Continuous signals and systems and their properties. Frequency analysis and Fourier series. The continuous Fourier transform (CFT) and its properties. Convolution, correlation and power spectral density functions. Discrete signals and systems and their properties. The discrete Fourier transform (DFT). Sampling theory, aliasing and truncation effects. Linear and circular convolution and correlation. The fast Fourier transform (FFT). The two-dimensional CFT and DFT. Applications of spectral analysis in geodesy, remote sensing, digital imaging, positioning and navigation.
333
Computing for Geomatics Engineers
Review of procedural programming and introduction to object-based programming using high level compiled and interpreted languages. Binary and ASCII File I/O, use of function libraries and class libraries. Construction of simple classes. Inheritance and polymorphism. Programming for Geomatics Engineering applications. Visualization and data representation.
343
Fundamentals of Surveying
Levelling: differential and trigonometric levelling. Angular. Distance measurements by taping and EDM. Precision and accuracy of survey observations. Computations: traversing and area, the first and second geodetic problem on the plane, trig sections, intersections, three-point resection and co-ordinate transformations. Route surveying: horizontal and vertical curves, earthwork computations. Routine procedures: setting out straight lines and right angles; measurement with obstructions. Setting out surveys. Topographic surveys.
351
Introduction to Geospatial Information Systems
Introduction to Geospatial Information Systems and Geographic Information Science, Georelational vector data model, object-based vector data model, raster data model, map projections, geodetic datums, co-ordinate systems, georeferencing, database design and management, query language, geometric transformations, vector data analysis, raster data analysis, spatial interpolation, terrain modelling and analysis, triangulated irregular network data model, path and network analysis.
363
Estimation and Statistical Testing
Least squares method: parametric, condition and combined cases. Linearization. Problem formulation and solution: error propagation, analysis of trend, problems with a priori knowledge of the parameters, step-by-step methods, combination of models, sequential solution methods, summation of normals. Introduction to univariate and multivariate statistical testing applied to geomatics engineering problems. Sampling distributions, tests of hypotheses on means, variances, proportions, and residuals.
401
Geomatics Engineering Design and Communication
Design and implementation of topographic surveys: survey specifications, equipment calibration, reconnaissance, design of survey control points, resection, traversing, differential levelling, and mapping. Error analysis, error figures and error visualization using a graphical approach. Principles of cartography: design, constraints and planning, generation and production of maps including scale, contours, and co-ordinate grids. UTM and 3TM co-ordinates. Digital cartography: computer-aided survey mapping and digital data generation. Communication of geomatics engineering information: technical reports, field notes, and graphical data representation.
419
Geomatics Networks
A systematic approach to "Geomatics Network Analysis and Optimal Design", which are two of the most important processes in establishing a Geodetic Network. Network observation reductions and pre-analysis. Network co-ordinate systems, observation models and least-squares adjustment. Network precision, reliability measures and analysis. Network design concepts, classification and methods. Network design for deformation monitoring and analysis. Other geodetic network applications. New network concepts.
421
Co-ordinate Systems
Fundamental concepts, definitions and basic aims of geodesy. Representation of the Earth's surface: physical and mathematical figures of the Earth, geodetic reference systems, frames and co-ordinates, reference ellipsoids and geodetic datums, maps. Time systems, basic motions of the Earth, dynamic behaviour of the Earth. Basic types of geodetic reference systems, computational procedures and co-ordinate transformation methods. Celestial co-ordinate systems and astronomic positioning. Elements of map projections, examples and applications.
423
Geodesy
Introduction to geodesy, its principles, tasks and applications. Measurements and methods for geodetic positioning. The gravity field and the geoid in science and engineering. Elements from potential theory, vector calculus, Gauss divergence, Green's theorems, boundary value problems. The normal field. Gravimetry and gravimetric measurements. Gravity reductions, isostasy. Geoid determination, Stokes's formula, combination methods, least-squares collocation. Vertical positioning and height datums and systems. Fundamentals of Earth's figure and gravity field estimation using perturbations of orbits of satellites and planets. Principles and applications of satellite gravimetry and satellite altimetry.
431
Principles of Photogrammetry
The role of photogrammetry in mapping applications (image acquisition and image measurement). Mathematical relationships between image space and object space. Two- and three-dimensional co-ordinate transformations. Conditions of collinearity and coplanarity; orientation procedures (interior, exterior, relative, absolute orientation and direct georeferencing); measurement and correction of image co-ordinates; stereomodel formation and error analysis; mathematical models for strip and block adjustments; project planning; principles of laser scanning.
435
Remote Sensing
A survey of modern quantitative remote sensing using optical, infrared and microwave radiation. Topics include: physical principles, including governing equations; imaging system geometries; radiometric corrections, including calibration and atmospheric correction; geometric corrections, including registration and land cover classification algorithms, including accuracy assessment and geospatial data integration.
443
Geodetic and Engineering Surveys
Instrument systems and procedures for engineering and geodetic surveys: precise levels, high-precision theodolites, electronic distance measurement instruments, gyro-theodolites. Heighting, triangulation, instrument calibration, observation procedures and reductions, introductory deformation analysis, error analysis, survey computations, map projection computations.
451
Design and Implementation of Geospatial Information Systems
Overview of Geographical Information Systems from a computing perspective. Topics include: Fundamental Database Concepts: relational algebra, UML modelling, and SQL; Fundamental Spatial Concepts: Geometry, Euclidean space, topological space, set notations, point set topology, and base graph theory; Models for Geospatial Information: object models and field models; Representations and Algorithms for GIS: computational complexity, discretization algorithms, topological data models and algorithms, TIN model, and computational geometry algorithms for GIS; Spatial Access Methods: B-Tree, Quadtree, and R-Tree; and Architectures; centralized and decentralized architectures.
455
Land Tenure and Cadastral Systems
Land tenure, cadastral systems, real property law, methods of acquiring rights in land, boundary concepts, cadastral survey computations, land registration systems, entity relationship models of land tenure systems, case law of boundary systems. History of cadastral systems, land administration, fiscal and juridical cadastres, dominion land systems, land registration in Alberta, special types of surveys relating to Canada Lands, structure of professional surveying bodies in Canada.
465
Satellite Positioning
Satellite orbit motion and Kepler's laws. Description of GPS signal structure and derivation of observables. Characteristics of instrumentation. Analysis of atmospheric, orbital and other random and non-random effects. Derivation of mathematical models used for absolute and differential static and kinematic positioning. Pre-analysis methods and applications. Concept of Kalman filtering applied to kinematic positioning. Ambiguity resolution procedures Overview of other GNSS, GNSS augmentation and high-sensitivity receivers Introduction to inertial navigation.
500
Geomatics Engineering Project
Principles of project management and applications in geomatics projects. Group project, under the supervision of a faculty member, on an assigned Geomatics Engineering topic. The project will normally involve a literature review, theoretical work, and laboratory or field work.
501
Field Surveys
Field exercises include: instrument calibration, cadastral retracement, determination of astronomic azimuth, conventional control survey for deformation analysis, real time kinematic surveying, geodetic control using static GPS, precise levelling, hydrographic surveying, and geographic information systems and data management. This course adopts a team-based learning approach and emphasis is placed on practical professional experience, planning, and logistic for field survey operations. Each team is required to produce a field work report for each field activity, and each student is responsible for a chapter, detailing one of the exercises, of the primary team report describing all of the work accomplished by the team during the course. The course concludes with a half-day seminar that focuses on the practice and profession of Land Surveying.
531
Advanced Photogrammetric and Ranging Techniques
Geometry and orientation of multi-image networks, self-calibrating bundle adjustment, direct versus indirect geo-referencing, 3D point cloud generation via structure-from-motion approaches, geometry of line cameras, principles of active imaging systems, mathematics of LiDAR mapping (registration and calibration), 3D point-cloud manipulation (feature extraction, segmentation and classification), photogrammetry and LiDAR data integration and fusion.
545
Hydrographic Surveying
Water levels and flow. Underwater acoustics including velocity and system parameters. Sonar and echosounder systems. Acoustic positioning concepts. Vertical positioning and datums. Types of surveys and specifications. Practical examples and survey data processing.
551
Advanced Geospatial Topics
Progress in research, development and applications in the field of geospatial technologies; importance of geospatial knowledge and evolution of geospatial technologies in the last decades; focus on six major geospatial technologies that characterize the so-called Geospatial Revolution; Geoweb, Virtual Globes, Volunteered Geographic Information, Location-Based Services, Big data and geospatial cyber-infrastructure; data/product quality, privacy and confidentiality, and societal implication of these technologies will be discussed.
559
Digital Imaging and Applications
An introduction to digital image processing (IP) and computer vision (CV) concepts, methods and algorithms which will enable the students to implement IP/CV systems or use IP/CV software with emphasis on remote-sensing and photogrammetry applications and problem solving. Course components include: image formation and intensity transformation, filtering in the spatial and frequency domain, colour image processing, feature detection and matching, image restoration, image segmentation, mathematical morphology and multi-source image/data fusion.
563
Data Analysis in Engineering
Fundamental of matrix theory, linear systems, probability and statistics. Data classification, analysis and bias identification. Random data acquisition, qualification and analysis. Least squares estimation and data analysis. Random process, stationarity test and kinematic modelling. Kalman filtering and real-time data analysis. Introduction to signal processing and time series analysis. Practical applications of data analysis and processing in geomatics engineering.
567
High-Precision Surveys
Instrument systems and procedures for high-precision surveys: precise levels, high-precision theodolites, electronic distance measurement instruments. High-precision industrial surveys: computation of three-dimensional orientations and rotations by autoreflection and autocollimation; computation of three-dimensional co-ordinates and co-ordinate changes by theodolite intersection methods, total station methods, scale bar on target methods, digital camera methods, laser scanner methods; systematic errors and their control; geometric form fitting. Case studies in high precision surveys.
573
Digital Terrain Modelling
Digital Terrain Modelling (DTM, DEM, DHM, DTEM) concepts and their implementation and applications in geomatics engineering and other disciplines. Emphasis will be on mathematical techniques used in the acquisition processing, storage, manipulation, and applications of DTM. Models of DTM (Grids, Contours, and TINS), data structures (Delaunay trianagulation, Voronoi diagram, Octree, k-D tree) processing (filtering, random sample concensus, surface normal computation), surface representation from point data using moving averages, linear projection, and Kriging techniques. Grid resampling methods and search algorithms used in gridding and interpolation. DTM derivatives (slope maps, aspect maps, viewsheds, and watershed). Applications of DTM in volume computation, and drainage networks.
579
Survey Law and Practice
Review of legislation, standards of practice and case law affecting property interests, property boundaries and boundary surveys. Evidence and boundary survey principles, riparian rights, title to land; Canada lands; Aboriginal rights; inter-jurisdictional boundaries; law of the sea. Reforms in the surveying profession. Field exercises may take place off campus over week-ends.
581
Land Use Planning
Theoretical and historical bases of planning. Urban reform and development of planning in Canada. Sustainable development. Subdivision planning process. Provincial and municipal planning approval requirements. Public participation. Site assessments. Field exercises may take place off campus over week-ends.
583
Environmental Modelling
Nature and purpose of environmental modelling; the top-down and the bottom-up approaches; typology of environmental models; definition of fundamental concepts; steps involved in designing and building a model; calibration, verification and validation of models; scale dependency; sensitivity analysis; characteristics, architecture and functioning of selected environmental models.
585
Wireless Location
Fundamentals of radio-frequency propagation, principles of radio-frequency positioning, observations and their associated error sources. Introduction to self-contained inertial sensors including odometers, gyros, accelerometers, and augmentation of RF methods with self-contained sensors and other data sources. Current systems: Assisted GPS, cellular telephone location techniques, pseudolites, location with wireless computer networks, ultra-wideband. Applications: outdoor and indoor personal location, asset tracking.
601
Graduate Project
Individual project in the student's area of specialization under the guidance of the student's supervisor. A written proposal, one or more written progress reports, and a final written report are required. An oral presentation is required upon completion of the course.
610
Geospatial Vision
Covers relevant computer vision methods for solving mapping problems. Topics include 2D/3D interest points and feature descriptors, stereo and multi-view stereo, image alignment, 3D reconstruction, range data processing (pre-processing, segmentation and alignment), 3D modelling from point clouds, deep learning for mapping, map inference and map matching.
612
Wellbore Positioning by MWD Sensors in the Directional Drilling
Provides a basic knowledge and techniques of wellbore positioning in the directional drilling by using measurement-while-drilling (MWD) gravity and magnetic sensors.
615
Advanced Physical Geodesy
Potential theory and geodetic boundary value problems (GBVPs). Solution approaches to the Molodensky problem. Least-squares collocation (LSC). Hilbert spaces with kernel functions. Variational principles, improperly posed problems and regularization. The altimetry-gravimetry and overdetermined GBVPs. Solution of GBVPs by integral techniques, fast Fourier transforms and LSC. Use of heterogeneous data sets and noise propagation. Applications to gravity prediction, geoid determination, deflection estimation, satellite altimetry and airborne gravimetry and gradiometry. Current research activities.
617
Participatory Geographic Information Systems (PGIS)
Introduction of methods to engage in effective dialogue and advocacy through the adoption of Participatory Geographic Information Systems (PGIS). Approaches learned to safeguard culturally sensitive information from external misuse and exploitation; methods to ensure traditional custodians maintain control of their spatial information; methods for producing, georeferencing and visualizing (indigenous) spatial knowledge that promote peer-to-peer dialogue, and their aspirations and concerns with higher-level authorities. The course will be a workshop forward that incorporates readings and various group exercises to provide students with a road make to undertaking PGIS.
620
Estimation for Navigation
Overview of estimation fundamentals including stochastic processes, covariance matrices, auto-correlation functions, power spectral densities, and error propagation. Review of least-squares estimation, summation of normals and sequential least-squares formulations, and role of measurement geometry in least-squares position estimation. Constraints and implementations. Concept of Kalman filtering; relationship between Kalman filtering and least-squares; linear, linearized and extended Kalman filter formulations; system model formulation; process noise model determination; measurement models, and effect of time-correlated measurements and possible remedies. Numerical stability issues in estimation and possible solutions. Statistical reliability in least-squares and Kalman filtering and related RAIM concepts. Introduction to other estimation techniques including unscented Kalman filters and particle filters. Application of above topics to relevant navigation estimation problems.
623
Inertial Surveying and INS/GPS Integration
Inertial sensors and their application in inertial navigation, existing inertial systems, new developments in strapdown technology. Practical aspects of inertial positioning definition of an operational inertial frame, inertial error models. Effect of inertial sensor errors on the derived navigation parameters, performance characteristics of inertial sensors, calibration of inertial sensors. Mechanization equations in different co-ordinate frames, step by step computation of the navigation parameters from the inertial sensor data introduction to Kalman filtering for optimal error estimation, modelling INS errors by linear state equations, practical issues for the implementation of update measurements (ZUPT, CUPT, Integrated systems), current research activities.
625
Advanced GNSS Theory and Applications
Overview of space positioning and navigation systems; concepts and general description. Global Navigation Satellite System signal description. Receiver and antenna characteristics and capabilities; signal measurements indoor; GNSS error sources and biases; atmospheric delays, signal reflection and countermeasures. Mathematical models for static point and relative positioning. Kinematic single point and differential post mission and real time positioning, navigation and location. Augmentation methods. Land, marine, airborne and indoor applications. Case studies.
629
Advanced Estimation Methods and Analysis
Introduction of different estimation criteria, error sources in estimation, modelling and testing requirements. Advanced least squares method, estimation equations and analysis. Random processes, dynamic models, Kalman filter equations and analysis. Implementation aspects. Concept of signal, least squares collocation equations and applications. Robust estimation principle and robustified least squares and Kalman filter. Data modelling issue in estimation, functional and stochastic model development for least squares and Kalman filter. Error analysis, conventional and robust statistical testing methods and analysis. Applications to geomatics engineering problems in geodesy, positioning and navigation, photogrammetry, etc.
633
Atmospheric Effects on Satellite Navigation Systems
Theoretical and observed aspects of radio wave propagation in the ionosphere and troposphere, with an emphasis on L-band (GPS) signals. Fundamentals of absorption, attenuation, depolarization, and defraction will be covered, in addition to characteristics and physical properties of the propagation medium and atmospheric constituents. The impact of such effects, and methods of mitigation, will be interpreted with respect to satellite navigation applications.
637
Earth Observation for the Environment

638
GNSS Receiver Design
Global Navigation Satellite System signal structure, overview of receiver architecture, measurements, antenna design, receiver front-end, reference oscillator, sampling and quantization, phase lock loops, frequency lock loops and delay lock loops, tracking loop design and errors, signal acquisition and detection, interference effects.
639
Advanced Topics in Digital Image Processing
Review of basic digital imaging; advanced topics in multispectral or hyperspectral analysis, multiresolution analysis, image segmentation, image transform, data fusion, pattern recognition or feature matching; current research applications especially in geomatics.
642
Optical Imaging Metrology
Optical imaging methods for precise close-range measurement. Photogrammetric techniques with emphasis on the bundle adjustment. Photogrammetric datum definition, network design and quality measures. Principles of laser rangefinding and laser scanning. Imaging distortions, sensor modelling and system self-calibration for a variety of imaging sensors including digital cameras, panoramic cameras, 3D laser scanners and 3D range cameras. Automated point cloud processing methods; registration, modelling and segmentation. Selected case studies.
645
Spatial Databases and Data Mining
Comprehensive overview of spatial database management systems and issues related to spatial data mining. Topics include: overview of spatial databases, spatial concepts and data models, spatial query languages, spatial storage and indexing, spatial networks, spatial data mining, and trends in spatial databases.
658
Geocomputation

667
Advanced Topics in Photogrammetry
Overview of aerial triangulation procedures (strip triangulation, block adjustment of independent models, bundle block adjustment, automatic aerial triangulation, direct versus indirect orientation). Mapping from space (modelling the perspective geometry of line cameras, epipolar geometry for line cameras). Multi-sensor aerial triangulation (integrating aerial and satellite imagery with navigation data). Photogrammetric products (Digital Elevation Models, ortho-photos). The role of features in photogrammetric operations (utilizing road network captured by terrestrial navigation systems in various orientation procedures).
675
Spatial Statistics
Spatial phenomena and spatial processes. Spatial data analysis and the importance of spatial data in scientific research. Methods will range from exploratory spatial data analysis through to recent developments such as nonparametric semivariogram modelling, generalized linear mixed models, estimation and modelling of nonstationary covariances, and spatio-temporal processes.
681
Advanced Global Geophysics and Geodynamics
Elasticity, figure of the Earth, Earth structure and seismology, gravity and its temporal variations, isostasy, tides, Earth rotation and orientation, time, plate flexure, glacial rebound, continental drift, geodetic observation methods for geodynamics.
691
Polarimetric Synthetic Aperture Radar
Introduction to image formation with polarimetric synthetic aperture radar (POLSAR), theory of polarized electromagnetic waves, polarimetric scattering from targets, POLSAR data models, speckle filtering, data decomposition, classification, and segmentation.
693
Cadastral Information Systems
Cadastral Systems, cadastral data, land registration, data structures and schemas for land administration information, ISO standards, evolutionary models, land tools, effectiveness metrics.
694
Advanced Topics in Sensor Web and Internet of Things
Overview of the sensor web architecture and algorithms, with a focus on Internet of Things. Topics include: sensor web data management, sensor web search and discovery, sensor web server design and implementation, interoperability issues, sensor-based analytics and visualization, introduction to sensor networks, and trends in sensor web and Internet of Things.
697
Directed Studies
Individual project study conducted under the guidance of a faculty member and intended to familiarize the student with the literature and techniques that are required for their research program, but are not available in regular courses.
698
Professional Development Seminar
This professional development seminar aims at providing relevant skills to be a successful graduate student and to make a smooth transition to a rewarding professional career. In addition to efficient communication skills, this course will place an emphasis on research methodologies such as formulating research problems, preparing a scholarship application, writing a paper for publication, and defending a thesis. How to prepare for a successful interview in industry or academia and the required process for becoming a professional engineer will also be discussed.
699
Special Studies
Focus on advanced studies in specialized topics that are not offered in the regular graduate curriculum of the Department.
Geophysics
30
351
Introduction to Geophysics
The key geophysical concepts and methods that are used to study the Earth and solve various geoscientific problems. Includes: earthquake seismology, gravity and magnetism, figure of the Earth, isostasy, heat flow, reflection and refraction seismology, radioactivity and geochronology, geodynamics, applications and case studies.
355
Exploration Geophysics
An introduction to refraction seismic, reflection seismic, gravity and magnetic methods applied to exploration for hydrocarbons, and their use in engineering studies.
375
Natural Disasters and Critical Earth Phenomena
Causes of disasters such as earthquakes, tsunami, volcanic eruptions, mud flows, landslides, avalanches, flooding, tornadoes and hurricanes, and other critical phenomena such as sinkholes, ozone depletion and radiation, carbon dioxide and global warming, El Nino, toxic natural materials and pollution, and extraterrestrial impacts. Surveys of historic disasters and their effects on life on Earth. Methods of prediction and prevention of disasters and precautions for the mitigation of their effects.
419
Computational Methods for Geophysicists
Topics in numerical analysis emphasizing geophysics applications. Topics will include error analysis, Taylor series, root finding algorithms, linear system solver algorithms, LU decomposition, curve fitting, numerical differentiation and integration, numerical solution of ODEs, introduction to PDE solvers.
453
Mining Geophysics
Electromagnetic, resistivity, induced polarization, self-potential, radiometric and gravity methods applied to problems in the search for metallic mineral deposits.
457
Physical Properties of Rocks
Physical properties of minerals and rocks, their relationship to geophysical measurements and surveys.
509
Independent Study
A written report based on independent study. Originality is emphasized, laboratory and field studies are encouraged.
517
Time Series Analysis and 1D Data Processing
Analysis of geophysical time series, especially real and synthetic seismic signals, is introduced using theoretical concepts and their practical application in a computational lab using commercial computational software.
547
Gravity and Magnetics
The nature of the magnetic and gravitational fields of the earth. Theory and applications of the gravity and magnetic methods of geophysical exploration.
549
Field School
Seismic, gravity, magnetic, electromagnetic, resistivity, induced polarization and topographic surveys will be conducted prior to the Fall Term.
551
Seismic Theory and Methods
Seismic wave propagation theory; various techniques of exploration seismology.
557
Multidimensional Data Analysis and Processing
Analysis and processing of 2D and 3D seismic data is explored using theoretical and practical concepts and applied in a computational lab using both commercial computational software and a commercial seismic data processing system.
559
Geophysical Interpretation
Analysis and integration of geophysical and geological data. Qualitative and quantitative interpretation. Industrial case studies.
565
Environmental Applications of Geophysics
Application of geophysical methods such as resistivity, electromagnetics, and ground penetrating radar to investigations of geological, geotechnical, hydrological, and environmental problems. Small-scale high resolution applications of other geophysical methods (seismic, gravity, magnetics).
599
Contemporary Topics in Geophysics
Courses are offered in contemporary topics in areas such as seismology, gravity and magnetics, electrical and electromagnetic methods, exploration and environmental geophysics, and integrated geophysical methods.
619
Advanced Computational Methods for Geophysicists
Review of important mathematical models in geophysics (Poisson equation, acoustic wave equation, elastic wave equation) and typical boundary conditions for elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations. Numerical solutions using finite difference, finite volume and finite element approaches. Algorithms for nonlinear constitutive behaviour and introduction to nonlinear optimization/inversion algorithms. Course includes an independent term project.
645
Seismic Wave Propagation
Seismic body and surface waves, reflection, refraction, diffraction, anelasticity, anisotropy, ray methods, point and line source solutions to the equation of motion, finite-difference methods for seismic waves, additional topics depending on current research interests.
657
Seismic Signal Analysis
Advanced methods of seismic data analysis in exploration and production geophysics. Topics include velocity analysis, polarization filtering, median filtering, migration, inversion and tomography.
665
Theoretical Seismology
Seismic ray theory, inverse theory, full-wave methods, matrix methods, numerical methods, additional topics depending on current research interests.
667
Introduction to Microseismic Methods
Use of microseismic methods as surveillance technology during hydraulic-fracture treatment of tight reservoirs. Methods for acquiring, processing and interpreting microseismic data. Methods for picking events, determining hypocenter location and magnitude, and interpreting the stimulated rock volume.
669
Global Seismology
An introduction to theory and practice of global seismology. Topics include: seismograph systems, global wave propagation, moment tensors, shear-wave splitting, surface waves, receiver functions, seismic tomography and teleseismic receiver functions.
671
Inverse Theory and Applications I
An introduction to the mathematical and numerical techniques of geophysical inversion. Topics include least squares, singular value decomposition, and Tikhonov regularization. Development of numerical codes to solve real inverse problems is stressed.
673
Inverse Theory and Applications II
Multidimensional real-world inverse problems, such as constrained seismic, gravity, or resistivity inversion. Fourier, maximum entropy, Bayesian approaches and iterative solution techniques such as Kaczmarz and conjugate gradient are covered.
681
Advanced Global Geophysics and Geodynamics
Elasticity, figure of the Earth, Earth structure and seismology, gravity and its temporal variations, isostasy, tides, Earth rotation and orientation, time, plate flexure, glacial rebound, continental drift, geodetic observation methods for geodynamics.
687
Theory of Seismic Imaging
The theories of wave propagation in acoustic and elastic media are used to develop the major algorithms used in seismic imaging (migration). Green's theorem, Huygen's principle, Kirchhoff diffraction theory, raytracing, wavetracking, multidimensional Fourier analysis, and Radon transforms are explored.
695
Research Topics and Tools
An introduction to seismic structural imaging and interpretation, seismic velocity anisotropy, and multicomponent seismology, including seismic survey design for PS converted waves. Discussion of software packages used for graduate research programs.
699
Selected Topics in Geophysics
Courses are offered in specific topics in areas such as seismology, environmental geophysics, potential methods, integrated geophysical studies, and geodynamics.
701
Advanced Independent Study
A written report based on laboratory and field studies is required.
703
Readings in Geophysics
A written report based on a literature review is required.
705
Graduate Skills in Geoscience
Provides incoming graduate students with an overview of professional skills that are key to success in graduate school and beyond. Presentation skills, writing scientific manuscripts, the peer review process, defence and candidacy exams, intellectual property and innovation, and networking basics.
German
28
200
Made in Germany
An introduction to the study of German-language cultures through key historical and contemporary works.
202
German I
A comprehensive course for students with no prior knowledge of the language. Includes training in listening, speaking, reading and writing of German in its cultural context. Corresponds to level A1 of the Common European Framework of Reference.
204
German II

305
Reading German
An introduction to analytic reading strategies for the purpose of understanding the content of moderately difficult texts with diverse content and discourse styles. Designed for students with no knowledge of German, who wish to be able to understand German texts.
317
Topics in German Culture
Distinctive features of German culture within a historical and contemporary context.
331
Continuing German I
A comprehensive course that includes training in listening, speaking, reading and writing of German in its cultural context. Development of increased sophistication in language production and cultural understanding. Corresponds to A2.2 of the Common European Framework of Reference.
333
Continuing German II

349
German Studies Research Methods
Introduction to research questions and research methods in German studies through case-study application.
353
Structure of German
Development of a structural understanding of the German language through an introduction to linguistic analysis, including research questions and research methods in German linguistics.
357
Topics in Film
German film from the perspectives of film theory and political and cultural history. May concentrate on a specific director, a period, or a genre in German film.
359
German Texts in Translation
Study of literary and cultural texts within the rich tradition of Germany's Dichter und Denker (poets and philosophers).
369
Telling Stories: Exploring German Literature
An introduction to historical and contemporary literary and cultural texts in German.
413
Intermediate German: Speaking and Listening
Targeted focus on aural/oral communication skills in a variety of contexts and media. Corresponds to B1.2 of the Common European Framework of Reference.
415
Intermediate German: Reading and Writing
Targeted focus on reading strategies, interpretive skills, and the production of a variety of texts. Corresponds to B1.2 of the Common European Framework of Reference.
451
Cross-Cultural Explorations
Cross-cultural comparison of events, cultural patterns, historical periods, or social movements which find a parallel in more than one of the cultural traditions represented in the School of Languages, Linguistics, Literatures and Cultures.
467
Topics in Advanced German Linguistics

469
Topics in Culture Change: Concepts and Critique

497
Inter-Cultural Immersion Experience
Independent study course. Project with Inter-cultural theme, derived from an immersion experience at an advanced level, most likely abroad.
501
Advanced German
Students will increase their overall proficiency, enhance their intercultural communication competencies, and review key grammatical concepts. Corresponds to B2.1 of the Common European Framework of Reference.
503
Senior Projects in Language
Students will integrate theory and practice in the use of German through a variety of class projects. Designed to expand and refine overall linguistic and intercultural competence. Corresponds to B2 of the Common European Framework of Reference.
551
Independent Study
Research project developed in consultation with and under supervision of instructor.
561
New Research Directions in German Studies
Centred on a professor's current research project, the course will engage senior students as members of a collaborative research team. Independent research, discussion, group presentations.
591
Honours Project
The Honours project for Honours students in their final year.
627
Seminar in German Literature and Culture
Selected topics in literary history.
629
Seminar in German Language and Linguistics

631
Seminar in German Language Pedagogy

696
Bibliography, Research Methods and Grant Proposal Writing

699
Conference Course
Meets the needs of individual students. It may include a general or specific linguistic topic; or the detailed study of an author, period, genre; or any literary problem not dealt with in the honours or graduate courses listed above.
Greek
11
201
Ancient Greek I
This course for beginners provides the first steps towards reading classical and New Testament Greek texts.
203
Ancient Greek II

301
Ancient Greek III
Completes the study of basic grammar, vocabulary and translation skills.
303
Intermediate Readings in Classical and New Testament Greek

401
Readings in Greek Prose
Readings will normally be selected according to genres, such as Historiography, Oratory, Philosophic and Didactic Prose, and the Novel.
403
Readings in Greek Poetry
Readings will normally be selected according to genres, such as Epic, Tragedy, Comedy and Lyric.
551
Directed Studies in Greek
Readings may be selected from any genre of Greek text at an advanced level.
601
Graduate Seminar

602
Introductory Ancient Greek for Graduate Students

604
Intermediate Ancient Greek for Graduate Students
Consolidation of grammar, vocabulary and translation skills.
607
Directed Studies

Greek and Roman Studies
47
205
Introduction to Greece and Rome
A historical survey from the eighth century BCE to the fourth century CE.
209
Classical Mythology and Literature
An introduction to Greek and Roman myths as presented in classical literature and art, and to their cultural context.
211
Technical Terms of Medicine and the Life Sciences
The Greek and Latin elements of modern medical and life-sciences terminology, with a brief introduction to their history and cultural background.
305
Greek Religion
A survey of religious beliefs and practices in the pre-Christian Greek world.
306
Roman Religion
A survey of religious beliefs and practices in the pre-Christian Roman world.
309
Comparative Mythology
An examination of Greek and Roman myths in comparison with myths of other cultures and societies.
311
Sport in Ancient Greece and Rome
A survey of sports practised in Greece and Rome and the role of sport as a cultural, political and historical phenomenon.
313
The Ancient Novel and Its Predecessors
A survey of ancient Greek and Roman 'novels' or romances, with reference to their roots in epic poetry and New Comedy.
315
Women and the Family in the Greek and Roman World

317
Humorous Prose:  From Rome to the Renaissance
A survey of ancient, medieval and Renaissance humorous prose, with reference to their roots in classical literature.
321
Ancient Technology
A survey of major technologies in antiquity (metallurgy, agriculture, hydraulics, pottery, textiles, transportation, writing, construction) with special emphasis on the technological achievements of the Bronze Age and the cultures of Greece and Rome.
323
Ancient Medicine and the Mind
A survey of ancient science and medicine, with special emphasis on early conceptions of the human mind, thought and knowledge.
325
Greek Art and Architecture
A survey of Greek art and architecture from the Bronze Age to the Hellenistic period.
327
Roman Art and Architecture
A survey of Roman art and architecture from the Etruscans to the beginning of the Christian Empire.
335
The Ancient Near East to Alexander the Great
History of the Near East from the tenth to the fourth century BCE.
337
Early Greece
Early Greece from the late Bronze Age to the Persian Wars.
339
History of Classical Greece
History of the Greek world from the Persian Wars to the conquests of Alexander the Great.
341
History of Rome's Expansion into the Mediterranean to 30 BCE
The expansion of Rome into an empire to the time of Augustus.
345
Rome: The Late Republic and Early Empire
History of Rome from 133 BCE to 180 CE.
347
Late Roman Antiquity
History of the Roman and Byzantine world from 180 to 565 CE.
355
Warriors and Lovers: Greek Literature in Translation
An introduction to Greek literature from Homer to the Hellenistic Period.
357
Myths, Slaves and Heroes: Roman Literature in Translation
An introduction to Roman literature from its beginnings to the second century CE.
413
Topics in Early and Classical Greek History

415
Topics in Hellenistic and Roman Republican History

417
Topics in the History of the Roman Empire
Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
419
Topics in Late Antiquity
Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
421
Topics in Greek and Roman Political and Military History
Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
423
Topics in Greek and Roman Social and Economic History
Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
425
Greeks, Romans and Other Cultures: Selected Topics
Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
431
Studies in Ancient Myths
Studies in the nature and functions of myth in ancient Greek and Roman culture and society. Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
433
Topics in Greek and Roman Religion, Intellectual and Cultural History
Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
445
Topics in Greek Art and Archaeology
Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
447
Topics in Roman Art and Archaeology
Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
455
Topics in Greek Literature in Translation
Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
457
Topics in Latin Literature in Translation
Topics will reflect developments in current research, will vary from term-to-term, and will be announced in advance.
459
Topics in Ancient Greece and Rome on Film
The reception of ancient Greek and Roman mythology and history through selected films.
483
Practicum
Provides students with program-related experiential learning through practical activities such as teaching, editing, publishing, translating, performances, exhibitions, museum work, conferences, information and website development, and campus, school and community programs. Projects must be designed in consultation with a departmental advisor. A written report and oral presentation are normally required.
491
Field Work
Provides credit, when transfer credit is not available of program-related study or field work in Europe or the Mediterranean area. Preliminary readings and a substantial report are normally required.
494
Field Work

499
Topics in Ancient and Medieval Historiography
Topics will include the analyses of the methods, sources, and key themes of major ancient and medieval historians.
501
Majors’ Special Topic
Interdisciplinary course to link knowledge and skills learned throughout the student’s undergraduate career.
504
Honours Thesis
The Honours essay for Honours students in their fourth year.
525
Research Seminar
Research topics in Greek and Roman history, literature, art, and archaeology. Seminar discussions will require a high level of student participation.
551
Directed Research
Qualified students will undertake supervised research projects individually or in small groups.
601
Graduate Seminar

603
Research and Professional Training

651
Directed Studies
Qualified students will undertake supervised research projects individually or in small groups.
Health and Society
7
201
Introduction to Health and Society
Introduction to public health, emphasizing the contributions of social research from several disciplinary traditions (anthropology, economics, epidemiology, geography, political science, psychology, and sociology) Students practice and refine several skill sets, including: library research, public speaking, teamwork, leadership and academic writing.
301
Determinants of Health
A broad-based, interdisciplinary overview of models of the determinants of health. Includes an analysis of evidence of the relative influence of environmental factors, health services, lifestyles and health behaviours, social and economic factors, biological predispositions, and the mechanisms involved in the societal uptake of various conceptions.
311
Health Services and Health Systems
Introduction to the Canadian health system, the health policy process, institutions and providers in the health system, health care insurance, financing and delivery of health care, population and public health, a systems approach to health in a national and international perspective
401
Foundations of Social Science Method
An examination of some philosophical principles underlying and debates involving methodology in the social sciences. Consideration will be given to features both common to the social sciences as well as to those which distinguish them. Where appropriate, applications to health phenomena will be emphasized.
403
Advanced Topics in Social Determinants of Health
Social determinants of health are key to understanding and intervening on health and disease in populations. This course builds on the understanding of the social determinants of health by exploring a few of these in greater depth. Topics will vary, buy may include racism, sexism and gender identity, Indigenous health inequities, or the built environment. Students will engage with research from a number of social science disciplines to explore the complexities and nuances that shape health inequities in a variety of environments in which people live and work. Case studies and contemporary events will be used to illustrate the interplay between a select few social determinants and health inequities each semester.
408
Health Research Methods and Research field practicum
An introduction to the research methods utilized in the Health Sciences. Students will begin to develop the knowledge and skills necessary to conduct research in the Health and Society field. The importance of research design, qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods and the theoretical constructs that inform these approaches will be emphasized.
591
Advanced Seminar in Health and Society
An advanced seminar involving critical analysis of contemporary health issues. Topics vary from year-to-year, but are always drawn from the current academic literature, from the public policy arena, and/or from the popular media.
History
132
200
Events and Ideas that Shook the World
Designed for non-history majors, this course introduces students to the historical craft through a series of short lecture sequences that focus on specific events, ideas, and individuals that changed the course of world history.
201
The History of Europe
Selected topics may include formation and breakdown of political structures: cultural, social, and technological continuity and change; development of religious and secular belief systems; interactions among cultures. Course content will vary each session. Please consult the History Department for more specific information.
202
An Introduction to Military History
Significant events and themes in military history.
203
The World to 1500
The development and rise of civilizations, their divergent and interacting patterns of belief, social and political organization and material and cultural life.
204
The World, 1500-1800
The political, economic, cultural, ecological and social connections among world regions.
209
The History of China
A survey of thought in China from the cultural heroes to the present, with emphasis on philosophy, religion, and ideology. Topics covered include Shang religion, Confucianism, Taoism, Mohism, minor schools of thought, Legalism, Buddhism, Neo-Confucianism, Qing textual studies, republican ideologies, nationalism, Marxism-Leninism Mao Zedong Thought, and late twentieth-century reformist movements.
211
Canada: Origins to 1867
An introduction to the dynamic themes in early Canadian history. Special attention will be devoted to social, economic, and political development, White-Aboriginal relations and the settlement of the Maritimes and the Canadas, and the opening of the West.
213
Canada Since 1867
Themes in the development of the Canadian nation from Confederation to the present, with particular attention to federal-provincial relations, economic development, social movements, and western political protest.
300
The Practice of History
Provides a grounding in the methods and practice of history.
303
Great Explorations
The concept of exploration from the time of Columbus to the space voyages, based on the reading of primary sources. Topics include the idea of conquest, views of different races and religions, and myths and realities of explorers and discovered lands.
305
Slavery in the Americas
History of the enslavement of Africans and their descendants in the New World from 1492 to 1888. Themes may include the slave trade, labor, culture and religion, resistance and rebellion, abolition, and slavery’s legacy.
307
The Contemporary World
The contemporary world from the nineteenth century era of industrialism and empire, through to twentieth century struggles of underdeveloped countries for independence. Focus on growing global interdependency and the rise and the erosion of western cultural, economic, and political hegemony.
308
Gender History
A global history of the construction of gender and sexual identities.  Examines how changing ideas about what it means to be male and female have influenced family structures, sexual mores, work life, military ideals, politics and culture.
317
East Asia from 1800
The modern histories of China, Japan and Korea beginning with the Mid-Qing dynasty in China and the Late Tokugawa period in Japan.
319
Early Medieval Europe, 410-1076
The sack of Rome to the eve of the Investiture Controversy. The economic, social and institutional features of Western Europe, including the origins and rise of the church, monasticism, barbarian kingdoms, feudalism and the agrarian economy.
321
High and Late Medieval Europe, 1076-1418
Western Europe from the emergence of national states to the end of the Great Schism. The evolution of the economic, social, religious and cultural structures of Medieval Europe: the revival of agrarian, commercial and urban economies, the development of religious divisions, and the rise of church and state powers.
326
Europe in the Age of the Renaissance and Reformation, 1400-1559
Political, social, cultural, intellectual and religious developments that transformed Europe at the end of the middle ages; roots of religious schism and its impact on politics, diplomacy and society.
327
Europe in the Era of Religious War, 1559-1715
The clash of Protestant and Catholic forces, the eventual decline in religious passions, and the general crisis of the seventeenth century.
332
Topics in Early Modern England
Topics may include culture and society, religion and ideas, monarchy and constitution, and empire and global relations.
333
The Age of Totalitarianism
Europe from 1900 to the Cold War. Emphasis will be placed on totalitarian regimes in Italy, Germany, and the Soviet Union; war and society in the two world wars; the Holocaust; and the Cold War.
337
Twentieth-Century Canada
Explores major themes in the emergence of modern Canada, with emphasis on the rise of a national consciousness, military and diplomatic involvements, the role of the state, socio-economic developments and national unity.
338
Modern Britain 1714 to Present
The Industrial Revolution; nationalism and imperialism; the rise of the middle and working classes; the social welfare state; emergence of modern British society, economy, politics, and constitution.
340
Ethnicity, Race, and Immigration in Canada
Examines developments in and challenges to diversity in Canada from the eighteenth to twenty-first centuries with emphasis on ethnic and immigrant cultures in rural communities and urban centres.
341
History of Popular Culture in Canada, 1850-Present
Selected themes in the historical development of popular culture in Canada. Topics include: leisure and recreation, sports and games, the arts, popular entertainment, travel and tourism, national heroes and icons, consumerism and the mass media.
345
Canadian Indigenous History
Aboriginal Canada, from the beginnings of contact with Europeans in the sixteenth century, to the present, with particular emphasis on Indigenous-Settler relations.
347
Western Canada
An exploration of Western Canadian history, including themes such as: the Indigenous peoples, European exploration, settlement, rural and urban society, social and political reform, the New West, and culture.
349
Canadian Military History
Survey of the history of the Canadian military in peace and war from 1867 to the present. Emphasis will be placed on Canada's role in World War I and World War II and on the development of the Canadian military in the Cold War era.
351
A History of Canadian Politics
The historical development of Canadian politics and political culture since Confederation. Major themes will include the emergence and changing role of parties, the impact of federalism, political insurgency and reform, and leadership.
354
Cities in Global History
History of the making of urban, landscapes in a global context. Topics may include the development of economic centres, urban technological and infrastructural innovations, and the complex relationships developing between the metropolis and its rural and wild hinterlands.
357
Wild West/Mild West?: Comparative History of the U.S. and Canadian Wests
The similarities and differences in the histories of the Canadian and U.S. Wests from the pre-colonial periods to the present. Topics may include the place of frontier and the West in national historical narratives, myths, and imaginations; aboriginal peoples; immigration and settlement; land policy and land use; and the social relationships and economies that characterize the U.S. and Canadian Wests.
359
The United States to 1877
A history of the United States from colonial settlement through the era of Reconstruction.
361
The United States since 1877
A history of the American people since the era of Reconstruction.
365
Latin America before Independence
The history of colonial Latin America with particular reference to political, social and economic themes such as race relations, imperial rivalries and the struggle for national independence.
367
Latin America since Independence
A history of the Latin American nations since independence with special attention devoted to political change, economic dependency and modernization, social and economic revolution, and inter-American relations.
372
Ways of Knowing: Science, Technology, and Medicine
A transnational examination of the relationships among these traditions in historical and cultural context. Topics may include: the scientific revolution; the early modern period; nineteenth-century technology and medicine; the emergence of the modern life sciences and neurosciences; changing scientific paradigms and research traditions.
376
History of Death in Western Culture
Examines the social, cultural, political, intellectual and religious developments from the Roman Empire to the contemporary period that transformed western concepts of death.
381
Military History: The Era of Revolutionary War and Total War
Significant events and themes in military history from the early modern period to the end of the Second World War.
383
Military History: The Cold War Era and Beyond
Significant events and themes in military history from the Cold War through to recent post-Cold War history.
395
History of Energy: From Fire to Fossil Fuels and Beyond
Transnational examination of the sources and uses of energy through history and their social, political, economic, and environmental impacts.
397
Topics in World History

398
Topics in History
Exploration of select regional, thematic or methodological issues in history.
402
Military History of Africa
Explores the history of warfare and military structures in Africa from earliest times to the present. Informed by what is often called the “New Military History,” discussion takes place within the context of broader social, cultural, economic and political developments.
404
The History of Taiwan
Survey of Taiwan history from ca. 1550 to the present, emphasizing pre-Chinese aboriginal history, migration to the island, government, society, inter-communal relations, Taiwan's international status, and recent democratization.
406
The Mongol World Empire
The rise of Chinggis Khaghan (Genghis Khan) in early thirteenth-century Eurasia, the growth and conquests of the Mongol world empire, and the individual khanates of Yuan dynasty China, the Golden Horde in Russia, the Il Khanate in the Middle East, and the Chagadai Khanate in Inner Asia.
408
The Global 1960s
Examines social, cultural, and political change in “the long 1960s” from a global perspective.
410
Topics in Great Cities of the World
An augmented experiential learning course where students integrate their own observations and experience with scholarly readings in a “Great City.” The regional and theoretical focus of the class will vary with the subject city.
412
Russia and the Soviet Union
A short introduction to pre-nineteenth-century Russian history and a survey of the history of Russia and the Soviet Union in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, finishing with a brief examination of post-Soviet Russia.
413
Modern Germany
German political, social, and cultural history from the late nineteenth century to the present. Topics will include unification, both world wars, Nazism, the Holocaust, the division of Germany, society and politics in the Cold War, and reunification.
422
Societies and Cultures in the Middle Ages
Explores the development and characteristics of Western medieval societies with regard to the social fabric, economic, religious, and intellectual life.
425
History of the Atlantic World
The history of the Atlantic Ocean world as a zone of contact, conflict, and co-operation between and among Europeans, indigenous peoples of the Americas, and Africans, circa 1450-1800.
426
The European Reformations of the Sixteenth Century
The origins, course, and impact of the religious reformations (Protestant and Catholic) of the sixteenth century, including changes to institutional structures, theology, and popular belief.
427
Ideas and Events that Shaped Modern Europe
Topics will vary to address major ideas and events that helped to shape modern Europe.
431
Canada During the World Wars
The nature, course and impact of Canada's involvement in the two world wars, with emphasis on home front developments.
435
History of Religion in Canada
A historical analysis of the pluralistic character of Canadian religions. Themes will include missions, Indigenous religions, awakenings, revivalism and social reform, fundamentalism and modernism, secularization and belief.
436
History of the University in Canada and the Western World
The development, ideas, and meanings of the university in Canada since the mid-nineteenth century. The rise of Canadian universities will be contextualized within the larger history of higher education institutions in the western world over the past one-thousand years.
437
Canadian Environmental History
Historical development of Canadian attitudes towards nature, from the First Nations and the first European settlers to the present day.
438
History of Women in Canadian Society
Topics may include the role of women in the economy, politics, social reform, the law, health care, the domestic sphere, life course experiences, and culture.
439
The Canadian West
Thematic treatment of topics in Western Canadian history.
442
Activism and Protest in Canada, 1867-Present
Examines cultures, ideas, and practices of activism and protest since Confederation. Topics include historical forms of political, ethnic, gender, religious, legal, and class-based meanings of equality and social justice.
443
The Métis People of Canada
An interdisciplinary study of the Métis people of Canada, with special emphasis on the historical, social, economic, and political factors influencing their emergence and continued survival as a distinct indigenous group in Canada.
447
Northern Horizons: Subarctic and Arctic Canadian History
Historical development of the region from the beginnings of European exploration to the present day. Themes include: the indigenous peoples, Arctic exploration, Canadian sovereignty, and the politics of northern development.
450
History of Social Policy in Canada
A historical analysis of the development of social policy in Canada from the colonial period to the present. Themes may include the relationship between citizens and government, changing perceptions on the role of the state, grassroots demands for government intervention, and the relationship between private and public programs.
458
The United States in the Era of Depression and WWII, 1900 to 1945
The history of the United States from the dawn of the twentieth century through World War II, a turbulent period of wars and economic depression at the end of which the U.S. had emerged as a global superpower. Major themes include the rise of liberal reform; the experience of the U.S. in two world wars; the interplay of race, class, and gender in shaping American identity; and the economics of boom and bust culminating in the Great Depression and wartime boom of the 1940s.
460
The United States Civil War Era
The political, economic and social history of the United States in the decades leading up to the Civil War, the military conflict itself and the aftermath of war.
461
From the Pueblo Uprising to Wounded Knee: A History of American-Indian Conflicts
Military and political clashes between tribal groups, colonial governments, and the U.S. government from the late 1400s to the late twentieth century, focusing on causal factors and eventual socio-political consequences.
462
United States Political History
Aspects of the history of American politics from the Revolution to the twentieth century. Emphasis on the process of governing; elections and party politics; legal and constitutional affairs.
463
The United States Since 1945
The political, social, economic, and cultural dimensions of the United States from 1945 to the present. Major themes include the role of U.S. as a global superpower during the Cold War and after; the contest between liberalism and conservatism in American politics; the social movements of the 1960s and 1970s and their lasting impact; suburbanization and consumer culture; and the transition to a post-industrial economy.
464
From Colonies to Nation: Making the United States
Explores the creation of the United States from its colonial origins through the Early National Period. Topics may include the political, military, diplomatic, legal, cultural and socio-economic challenges faced by the new nation.
467
Mexican History
Themes of Mexican history from the founding of Spain’s most important colony, New Spain, to the present.
471
The Military in Latin America
The history of warfare and the armed forces in Latin America from colonial times to the present. Emphasis upon modern wars, militarism, the rise of caudillos, and the impact of the military on society.
472
Latin American Revolutions
Thematic treatment of social revolutions in twentieth-century Latin America.
473
History of Crime and Criminal Justice in England
Crime and the development of the criminal courts and jurisdictions, the police, punishments, and correctional institutions, from medieval to modern times. Attention will be given to the relationship of criminality to moral attitudes and socio-economic conditions, and to the historic role of crime and punishment in local communities, society and the state.
476
A Cultural History of Biomedical Sciences
Explores changing concepts about life, biology, and medicine from the European Renaissance to the twentieth century. Topics may include the rise of natural history, genetics, molecular biology, and neuroscience.
483
World War I
An examination of the nature and course of the First World War (1914-1918), with an emphasis on the Western Front. Topics will include the historiography of the war, strategy and tactics, the impact of technology, and the effect of the war on the nations involved.
485
World War II
The nature, course and short-term results up to 1950 of the Second World War in its global dimensions. The political as well as the military side of the Allied/Axis conflict will be studied.
486
History of Air Power
An examination of the nature and development of air power across the world. Topics may include: technology; tactics; doctrine; the relationship between air power, weapons of mass destruction and precise attacks; the limits to air power and its role in war, peace, and deterrence.
487
Brazilian History since 1500
Economic development, political institutions, social and cultural trends, and the interaction between men and women and the environment.
488
Great Britain as a Great Power, 1690 - 1970
A study of British military, diplomatic and imperial history between 1690 and 1970, with a focus on the roots of Britain's power.
489
Espionage and the State, 500 BCE - 1939
The rise of modern intelligence services in the West. Changes in the role, importance and technology of intelligence will be assessed. The contribution of intelligence to political and military strategy in selected conflicts will be examined.
490
Espionage and the State, 1939 to the Present
Intelligence during the Second World War, the Cold War, and afterward. Changes in the role, importance and technology of attention will be assessed. The contribution of intelligence to political systems, international relations and military operations will be assessed.
491
Diplomatic History

493
Topics in History
Selected topics in social, cultural, political, or military history. Previous topics have included the Vietnam War, the North American Petroleum Industry.
494
International History of Energy
Twentieth-century history of energy in an international context. Topics may include international relations and political economy focusing on governments, international institutions, and multinational corporations and the role of energy in international conflict and co-operation.
495
Film and History
Film as a historical document, in particular as a source of social and intellectual history. Topics include: the role of film at moments of decisive historical change; the content and dissemination of political ideologies and social values; film as a source of propaganda; changing attitudes to minority groups; preservation of historical detail.
496
Historical Methods and Philosophies of History
A seminar for honours students on the interrelationship between the philosophies of history and historical methodology.
510
Religion, Politics, and Culture in Early Modern Europe
Examines the nature of late medieval religion, the social impact of the Reformations, religious violence and co-existence, and the nature and practice of royal absolutism.
511
Topics in Gender and Sexuality in History
An examination of gender theory and history with an emphasis on issues of sexuality. Topics and geographic concentrations will vary.
514
Topics in Britain and the Wider World, 1500-1800

517
Social and Political History of Modern Britain
Topics in social, cultural and political history in early modern and modern times: e.g., the rise of the gentry and the middle class, working class identity, radical ideology and two-party politics.
518
Topics in Twentieth-Century German History
Topics may include: thematic explorations and/or comparisons of dictatorial regimes (Nazi Germany and the German Democratic Republic); the history of the GDR; the two Germanies during the Cold War; memory and memorialization in popular culture; the contested formation of a multicultural society; and social protest in the post-WWII period. For further information on specific topics to be offered in any year, consult the History Department.
520
Canada and the First World War
Discussion topics will focus on the major themes in Canada's Great War military experience, including the Canadian Expeditionary Force's recruitment and training, leadership, tactical doctrine, and integration within the British Expeditionary Force, as well as developments in civil-military relations, conscription politics and the country's post-war military legacy.
521
Canadian Biography
A thematic approach to Canadian personalities, emphasizing the biographer's method and changing interpretations of major Canadian figures, e.g., the prime ministers, prominent women, radicals, prophets, scientists, explorers, entrepreneurs, journalists and artists.
523
Topics in Alberta History
Selected topics in Alberta history with emphasis upon the use of local archival sources.
526
The Canadian Military in the Second World War
Examination of the political parameters imposed by the Canadian government on the military, the quality of Canadian leadership, and the "fit" between British forms of military organization and the fighting quality of Canadian soldiers, sailors and aircrew during the Second World War.
528
Exchange, Trade, and Cultural Encounter in North America
The history of cross-cultural contact in North America from the late sixteenth through nineteenth centuries, examining cultures, economies, trading institutions and views of New and Old World people.
529
Topics in Indigenous History
A history of the Indigenous peoples of Canada: the First Nations, Inuit and Métis.
530
Topics in Canadian Foreign and Defence Policy from 1919 to the Cold War Era
Selected topics in the history of Canadian foreign policy and defence policy from the end of World War I to the 1980's.
535
Topics in American History
Selected topics in the history of the United States from the colonial period to the present.
537
American Memories
Introduces students to the broad subject of historical memory, with a focus on the United States. Considers ways that historians have grappled with constructions of collective memory, personal memory, commemoration, and remembrance. Focuses on publicly controversial topics like remembering slavery, the Civil War, and the use of the Atomic Bomb in World War II.
539
Oral History
Introduces students to the theory and practice of oral history. Topics include ethics, methodology, memory, and community-based research. Students will conduct oral histories as one of their assessments.
540
Topics in Medieval History
Selected topics in Medieval History. Subjects may include: the history of medieval families; collective and individual identities, the social fabric; economic, religious and intellectual life.
541
Topics in the History of Science
Selected aspects of the history of science, e.g., the scientific revolution, science and religion in the seventeenth century, history of scientific methods, studies of individual scientists such as Galileo, Boyle, Newton, or Darwin.
544
Topics in Great Power Diplomacy and Intelligence
An exploration of selected themes in the history of modern statecraft. Topics may include: theories of international relations, war origins, treaty-making, Fascist diplomacy, appeasement, wartime alliances, intelligence and policy, cold war diplomacy. A seminar in which primary sources will be used.
545
Topics in Military History
An examination of selected problems in modern military history. Topics may include: military theory; guerrilla warfare from the eighteenth century to the twentieth century; evolution of tactics in World War I; development of military medicine; innovation in European armies; colonial wars.
547
Chinese Strategic Thought
The history of Chinese strategic thought from antiquity through modernity, with emphasis on the Seven Military Classics, Chinese military history, and recent scholarship on the extent of the connection between historical and modern Chinese strategic thought.
551
Women in Canadian Politics
A political history of women in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Topics include campaigns for suffrage, legal personhood and equality rights, women’s political activism, the evolution of public policy concerning women, and the participation of women in public life.
565
Slavery in Latin America and the Caribbean, 1492-1888
Themes may include the slave trade, plantation and urban slavery, resistance and rebellion, women, culture and religion, abolition, free people of colour in slave societies, and the post-abolition legacy.
569
Latin America and the Outside World
The Latin American nations in world affairs with special reference to their intellectual, economic, and political relations with Europe, North America, Africa, and the Pacific Rim. Themes will be drawn from the sixteenth to the twentieth centuries.
573
Topics in African History
Selected topics in African history from pre-colonial times to the present. Topics may include the “Scramble for Africa,” Africa and the World Wars, decolonization and African nationalism, and mass violence and genocide.
591
Directed Reading and Research
The analysis of historical problems and the use of primary sources.
593
Selected Topics in History
Exploration of select regional, thematic, or methodological issues in history.
597
Honours Directed Reading
Directed readings for Honours students in their third or fourth year.
598
Honours Writing Seminar
The Honours Thesis for Honours students in their fourth year.
601
Topics in Imperial History

603
Topics in Religious History

607
Topics in Western Canadian History

623
Topics in Canadian History
An examination of crucial issues in Canada's political, economic, social and cultural history.
633
Topics in Modern European History

637
Topics in Military History

639
Topics in History of Science
Topics may include the scientific revolution, science and religion, and the reception of scientific ideas.
641
Topics in Medieval or Early Modern European History

645
Topics in U.S. History

647
Topics in Latin American History

651
Research Essay I
Provides course-based students an opportunity to propose their MRE projects to the other students, critique as a group their methods, sources and bibliographies, and present drafts of their projects for peer comment.
653
Research Essay II
In consultation with their supervisor, the student completes an essay modelled on a scholarly research article, to be evaluated on use of primary sources, historiographical framing, and argumentation.
655
Classics of Strategy
Strategic thought from Sun Tzu to Clausewitz, Mahan to Corbett. Analyzes the writings of classic strategic thinkers, and then by way of case studies examines their theories as they pertain to military and political planners from the Peloponnesian War to the present.
673
Topics in Legal History

675
Selected Topics in History

690
Historiography and the Theories of History

691
Conference Course in Special Topics

791
Conference Course in Special Topics (Advanced Level)

795
Advanced Seminar in Historiographical Interpretations

Indigenous Languages
2
301
Indigenous Language I
Primary emphasis on the acquisition of conversational skills and vocabulary.
303
Indigenous Language II

Indigenous Studies
15
201
Introduction to Indigenous Studies
A multi-disciplinary, theoretical and empirical overview of the situations, perspectives, and aspirations of selected Indigenous peoples with a focus on the Canadian context.
303
Indigenous Ways of Knowing I
An introduction to various Indigenous peoples ways of knowing (epistemology) with a special emphasis on the contextualization of knowledge-building. Deals with various aspects of building knowledge, such as listening, reflection, protocol, and experience.
305
Indigenous Ways of Knowing II
An examination of the nature and relations of being (ontology) and specific responsibilities in cultural context. Integration of components of Indigenous ways of knowing. International comparison of Indigenous ways of knowing.
312
Cultural Immersion Field Course
Experience of ceremonial and cultural activities, with a focus on four themes: living values; spirituality; health and healing; and roles, responsibilities, and respect.
317
Ecological Knowledge
Experiential exploration, consideration, and application of Indigenous ecological knowledge, philosophies, and contemporary issues.
343
Indigenous Law in Canada
Examination of the special legal and constitutional principles, provisions and instruments that have an impact on Indigenous individuals, governments and organizations. Topics covered may include aboriginal rights, treaty rights, self-government, fiduciary duties, the Royal Proclamation of 1763, the Indian Act, the 1982 Constitution, and pivotal court decisions.
395
Topics in Indigenous Gender, Sexuality and Feminism
Selected topics that engage the history, politics, and contemporary contexts of Indigenous feminisms, queer studies, two-spirit studies, maternity, and masculinities in Canada and throughout Indigenous North America.
397
Topics in Canadian Indigenous Studies
Selected themes in Canadian Indigenous studies.
399
Topics in International Indigenous Studies
Selected themes in International Indigenous studies. May focus on Indigenous peoples of only one country.
400
Directed Research in International Indigenous Studies
Supervised study of a theme in the area of International Indigenous Studies.
407
Comparative International Indigenous Communities
Social, economic, and political comparisons between selected Indigenous communities throughout the world.
415
Indigenous Ethics and Protocol
Examines principles underlying Indigenous ethics and academic and local research protocols, including indigenous ways of knowing, indigenous methodologies, notions of relationship, spirituality, community, and responsibility in academic research, teaching and learning when collaborating with Indigenous peoples.
492
Indigenous Psychology
An in-depth examination of research in psychology related to Indigenous populations, including the history of research, major topics, appropriate approaches to conducting research, and new directions.
502
Advanced Topics in Canadian Indigenous Studies
Investigation of selected topics in Indigenous issues in Canada.
503
Advanced Topics in International Indigenous Studies
In-depth investigation of selected topics in international Indigenous issues.
Information Security
9
601
Applied Cryptography
The basics of cryptographic algorithms and protocols including encryption and authentication algorithms and key establishment protocols. Security evaluation in computational and information theoretic settings, and attacks on cryptographic applications and systems.
603
Network Security
Review of cryptographic algorithms and protocols used in network security. Network security protocols. Network security architecture. Web and Internet security. Wireless security. Approaches and tools for network intrusion detection and prevention. Traffic analysis and privacy enhancing systems. Applications of artificial intelligence and data analytics. Network system virtualization.
605
System and Application Security
Operating systems security. Software vulnerabilities and their exploits. Malware. Computer system virtualization. Application-level security. Access control models. Identity and access management.
621
Ethical Hacking Laboratory
Offensive security, including technical and social methods. Legal and ethical frameworks as well as best practices. Automation and tool use, and defensive techniques.
623
Software Security Laboratory
Practices and tools for preventing vulnerabilities in the software development life cycle, including threat modelling, secure coding idioms and secure design patterns, static analyzers for detecting vulnerabilities, fuzzing and other quality assurance practices.
625
Mobile and Smart Device Security Laboratory
Security architecture of common smartphone platforms and Internet-of-Things environments. Selected topics on threat modelling, penetration testing, and security-aware design for smartphones, home automation, wearables, vehicles and industrial control systems.
641
Governance and Risk Management
Information security strategy and its alignment with business goals. Business cases for information security investment. Legal and regulatory requirements. Roles and responsibilities in information security management. Security risk assessment and management.
643
Policies, Standards and Programs
Development of security policies. Policy compliance and enforcement. Policy considerations for social engineering and insider attacks. Information security standards. Security awareness and training programs. Privacy policies and compliance. Privacy Impact Assessment.
645
Incident Management and Forensics
Design and implementation of process for identifying, analyzing and responding to information security incidents. Computer forensics. Organization and management of the incident response and forensics team. Tools and best practices.
Innovation
2
321
Principles of Innovation
Innovation is a process through which knowledge and new ideas are applied to create new economic and social benefits. Students are introduced to definitions, contexts, language, dynamics, historical and contemporary examples, issues, aspects, outcomes, pitfalls, and impacts of the innovation process from a multidisciplinary perspective. Literature on innovation is explored. Seeks to develop in students the intuitive and imaginative skills necessary for inventive processes, and to investigate the impact of the innovation process. Blend of face-to-face and web-based instruction.
323
The Practice of Innovation
Provides experience in the innovation process, to aid students to understand the nature of this creative process in different contexts, and to nurture innovative thinking. Hands-on project in multidisciplinary teams of students and professors. Student projects will take the form of case studies of and/or involvement in actual innovation processes in different contexts. Seeks to teach through experience and peer-based interaction the processes of invention. Term will end with an "innovation fair" of teams' presentations. Blend of face-to-face and web-based instruction.
International Foundations Program
38
150
Foundational Academic Writing and Grammar I
Develop basic writing and grammar skills of standard written English. The focus is placed on the development of simple and compound sentences. Students will also learn appropriate use of modifiers, noun phrases, past and future verb tenses, repositions, comparatives, articles, spelling, punctuation and work on expanding their range of academic vocabulary.
153
Foundational Reading Comprehension and Proficiency I
The development of academic literacy skills. Topics covered are reading for comprehension, improvement in reading speed, and vocabulary expansion. Development of dictionary and thesaurus skills via use of monolingual English dictionaries and thesauri will also be an essential aspect of the course. Other sub-topics covered will be word forms, determining meaning for words in context, and the use of basic affixes in the prediction of meaning.
157
Foundational Listening Comprehension and Oral Fluency I
Continues the development of basic listening comprehension and speaking skills. Listening strategies and exercises will focus on comprehension of live or recorded audio instructions. Students will focus on comprehension and identification of vocabulary, argument development, main ideas and other specific details during listening practice. Speaking will focus on oral grammar, pronunciation, and basic rules of Canadian English discourse.
160
Foundational Academic Writing and Grammar II
Develop writing fluency through study and practice of compound and complex sentence patterns used in standard written English. The main focus will be the process of paragraph analysis and composition. A also integrates aspects of complex grammar structures and their appropriate usage.
163
Foundational Reading Comprehension and Proficiency II
Emphasizes the development of academic literacy skills. Instruction will be focused on recognition of word pair analogies, common idiomatic expressions, and higher-level vocabulary. Students will also learn about inference, context clues, and predicting meaning from their readings, as well as multiple genres of reading materials in fiction and non-fiction.
167
Foundational Listening Comprehension and Oral Fluency II
A continuation of the development of listening comprehension and speaking skills. Focus will be placed on the development of pronunciation skills, public speaking, formal class presentations, appropriate use of verbal and non-verbal communication techniques, and development of interviewing strategies. Listening strategies and exercises will focus on comprehension of live or recorded audio instructions and stories.
230
Foundational Academic Reading and Writing for Business Studies
Develop academic skills in reading and writing pertinent to business studies. Facilitate the acquisition of reading comprehension skills in order to extract meaning from a specific context. Focus on skills to structure ideas and produce short texts.
235
Foundational Academic Listening and Speaking Skills for Business Studies
Develop academic skills in listening and speaking pertinent to business studies. Facilitate the acquisition of listening comprehension skills in order to extract meaning from academic listening events. Focus on speaking skills to communicate and report ideas in academic business settings.
236
Academic Reading and Writing for Business Studies
Foster academic skills in reading and writing pertinent to business studies. Develop reading comprehension skills to evaluate and incorporate meaning. Focus on skills to communicate ideas and arguments through conventional texts.
237
Academic Listening and Speaking Skills for Business Studies
Develop academic skills in listening and speaking pertinent to business studies. Facilitate the acquisition of listening comprehension skills in order to extract meaning from academic listening events. Focus on speaking skills to communicate and report ideas in academic business settings. Foster academic skills in listening and speaking pertinent to business studies. Develop listening comprehension skills to construct meaning through integrated and multimodal academic listening events. Focus on speaking skills for persuasion through meaning-driven interaction in academic business settings.
240
Introduction to Academic Writing for STEM
Focuses on skills required for progressing from academic paragraphs to essays, requiring more precise language use for description, opinion and explanation. Critical thinking skills are developed through analysis and evaluation of STEM topics. Issues of academic integrity are explored.
242
Intermediate Language and Skills Development
Develops academic reading, listening and speaking abilities through practice and use. Complimenting this, a continuing focus on the development of critical thinking and logical argumentation skills as well as study and learning strategy development.
246
Intermediate Academic Writing for STEM
Focuses on refining essay structure and mastering chronological, comparison and contrast essays. Includes development of personal style, coherence and cohesion in writing on STEM topics. Principles of citation and referencing will be reinforced to further develop understanding of academic integrity.
248
Academic Success in STEM
Assists new students in understanding university study requirements, and establishing beneficial study techniques. Through STEM language and educational tasks, students will develop approaches to academic success including critical thinking, logical argumentation, time management, goal setting, and self-reflection.
250
Introduction to Academic Written Communication for Engineering
Introductory scientific writing skills including reading in scientific texts to develop research skills, sense of audience, tone, register, organization patterns, grammar and mechanical concepts, and vocabulary, with a focus on lab reports.
257
Introduction to Academic Oral Communication for Engineering
Academic oral language skills in technical/scientific contexts including presentations, group problem solving, creating lecture notes, and pronunciation, as well as effective study skills and habits.
270
Academic Writing and Grammar I
Designed for low to high intermediate students of English as an additional language. A focus on skills required for writing academic paragraphs, from brainstorming ideas to the final written product. The paragraph writing will progress to essay writing through the course requiring a more precise use of language for description, opinion and explanation. Writers will practice their critical thinking skills as they analyze and evaluate the topic-related issues and develop their own ideas and ways to express them.
273
Reading Comprehension and Proficiency I
Designed for low to high intermediate students of English as an additional language. Students will use a variety of strategies to read academic and non-academic text to build vocabulary in context, and to understand how authors structure language to communicate information and opinion in different types of compositions. Students will practice their critical thinking skills as they analyze and evaluate the readings and express their own ideas.
277
Listening Comprehension and Oral Fluency I
Designed for mid-level to high intermediate English as a second language students. Students will practice and develop their listening skills covering a wide range of academic topics in a variety of presentation styles. Improving pronunciation and practicing communication skills for a variety of settings along with the development of critical thinking.
280
Academic Writing and Grammar II
To improve high intermediate to low advanced students' academic writing skills. Refine the essay structure with a focus on mastering the chronological, comparison and contrast essays. Emphasis will be placed upon the sequence of steps in the writing process. Students will learn varied sentence types, more sophisticated writing techniques, advanced grammar, research topics, and documenting academic references
283
Reading Comprehension and Proficiency II
For high intermediate to low advanced students to continue to refine their reading skills within theme-based chapters. Students will build academic vocabulary, study word derivatives, and will increase their ability to use an advanced English dictionary. Students will learn and use critical thinking strategies to respond to texts and articles through discussion, debate and written assignments. In addition, students will begin to explore academic journals of interest to their future studies.
287
Listening Comprehension and Oral Fluency II
High intermediate to low advanced students continue to develop their academic listening and speaking skills. Students will hone critical thinking skills, academic vocabulary and practice pronunciation. Students will also attend on-campus lectures of their choice to practice note-taking.
290
Academic Writing and Grammar III
Develop advanced writing skills while reviewing the various organizational patterns for multi-disciplinary academic essays. Advanced grammatical and mechanical concepts are fostered. Students will develop an understanding of the process approach to writing, appropriate referencing, documenting, paraphrasing and summarizing. Critical thinking strategies will be promoted in order for students to create individual conclusions about issues.
293
Reading Comprehension and Proficiency III
Develop advanced reading skills and effective reading strategies for the genres of text found at the undergraduate level. These texts will be used for obtaining information and building vocabulary. Students will employ critical thinking strategies in order to reach independent conclusions and respond analytically.
297
Listening Comprehension and Oral Fluency III
Master the listening and speaking skills necessary for undergraduate study. Lectures from a variety of disciplines will be analyzed so that students can develop valuable comprehension strategies, including preparing for a lecture and taking effective notes. Academic discussions about complex, abstract and detailed topics covered in the lectures will be held in order to analyze, problem-solve and make decisions. Oral presentation techniques, pronunciation and critical thinking strategies will be further explored by the students.
332
Advanced Academic English for Business Studies
Facilitate the synthesis of written discourse adhering to the characteristics of academic language in business studies. Focus on language analysis skill to produce coherent written discourse and ease the processing for the receiver.
334
English for Professional Business Purposes
Facilitate applied language skills for further studies and professional communication in business studies. Focus on persuasive communication skills required for both oral and written discourses in professional business settings.
340
Advanced Academic Writing for STEM
Develops advanced writing skills while reviewing organizational patterns common in STEM genres. Focuses on a process approach to writing, appropriate referencing, documenting, paraphrasing, summarizing and research skills. Critical thinking strategies are promoted to develop individual conclusions about issues.
342
Advanced Language and Skills Development
Continues to develop academic reading, listening and speaking abilities through practice and use. Complimenting this, a continuing focus on advanced critical thinking and logical argumentation skills as well as consolidation of effective study and learning strategy development skills.
346
Technical Writing
Focuses on strengthening ability to write clearly and concisely in science disciplines, including documenting processes, steps and procedures, descriptions and discussions of results with visuals such as tables and graphs. Special attention paid to written coherence and proofreading skills.
350
Advanced Academic Written Communication for Engineering
Advanced scientific and technical communication for extensive writing tasks in the Schulich School of Engineering. Participants will read scientific and technical writing, develop research skills and information literacy, critically analyze data, enrich vocabulary focused on scientific contexts, and foster rhetorical understanding and synthesis of information.
357
Advanced Academic Oral Communication Skills for Engineering
Advanced academic oral language and academic communication skills for use in the Schulich School of Engineering. Participants will learn skills for communication in technical contexts, and develop fluency, accuracy and clarity. Tasks will include note taking on extended lectures, research and critical thinking, presentations, discussion leading and group problem-solving.
451
Introduction to Academic Written Communication for Engineering
Basic scientific writing skills and written academic communication expectations for use in engineering contexts. Focus will include how to read scientific texts, developing research skills, written communication contexts, grammar and mechanical concepts, and audience, as well as developing academic and scientific vocabulary.
455
Introduction to Academic Oral Communication Skills for Engineering
Participants will develop their English speaking and listening skills for use in engineering contexts through participation in academic presentations, note-taking, and group problem solving scenarios.
459
Introduction to Academic Culture and Communication
An introduction to the academic culture and communication expectations for study including physical and online infrastructure, as well as improve language skills necessary to navigate university entrance and commence studies.
559
Advanced Academic Communication for Engineering
Participants will develop writing for scientific reports, technical writing, and applications, and develop reading skills for identifying bias, synthesizing information, vocabulary acquisition and researching. Presentation skills, as well as note-taking and questioning strategies, will also be practiced.
651
Advanced Academic Written Communication for Engineering
Facilitate the synthesis of written discourse adhering to the characteristics of academic language in the Master of Engineering program. Focus on writing and research skills required for graduate level academic studies.
655
Advanced Academic Oral Communication for Engineering
Facilitate applied language skills for communication in the Master of Engineering program. Focus on oral communication skills required for graduate level academic studies.
International Foundations Program Business
6
201
Language Enrichment for Economics 201

203
Language Enrichment for Economics 203

213
Language Enrichment for Statistics 213

217
Language Enrichment for Management Studies 217

227
Language Enrichment for Strategy and Global Management 217

231
Fundamental Academic Communication
Introduction of academic culture and communication expectations for the study in the Haskayne School of Business, including physical and online infrastructure, as well as, improving language skills necessary to navigate university entrance and commence studies.
International Foundations Program Engineering
14
200
Adjunct for Engineering 200

201
Adjunct for Engineering 201

202
Adjunct for Engineering 202

209
Adjunct for Chemistry 209

211
Adjunct for Mathematics 211

225
Adjunct for Engineering 225

233
Adjunct for Engineering 233

259
Adjunct for Physics 259

275
Adjunct for Mathematics 275

277
Adjunct for Mathematics 277

621
Language Enrichment for Petroleum Engineering 621

682
Language Enrichment for Engineering 682

683
Language Enrichment for Engineering 683

684
Language Enrichment for Engineering 684

International Relations
3
301
A Multidisciplinary Survey of International Relations
A survey of International Relations integrating the approaches applied in various Social Sciences disciplines.
501
Advanced Seminar in International Relations
An integrative seminar on selected themes from the International Relations field.
597
Directed Study in International Relations
Study of a particular topic under the direct supervision of a faculty member.
Internship
7
503
Internship in Computer Science

513
Internship in Engineering

591
Professional Theatre Internship

601
Graduate Internship (Thesis-based, full-time)

602
Graduate Internship (Thesis-based, part-time)

603
Graduate Internship (Course-based, full-time)

604
Graduate Internship (Course-based, part-time)

Interprofessional Health Education
9
501
Interprofessional Practice in Mental Health
Students from different helping professions come together to examine selected issues of interprofessional practice in the area of mental health and co-occurring addictive disorders, focusing on the experience of mental illness, treatment alternatives, practice implications, advocacy and policy issues, and future challenges and change. Incorporates in-class and field experiences with consumers and families, employers and professionals, services and organizations.
503
Interprofessional Practice in Addictions
Students from different helping professions come together to examine aspects of addictions assessment, treatment and recovery and issues of co-occurring mental health disorders in an interprofessional context. Studies include the complex array of treatments, programs and supports available in a Canadian context, and critical examination of the ancillary issues of community care, and other support services that are required for successful recovery and relapse prevention for those with addictive disorders and co-occurring mental health issues.
598
Selected Topics in Interprofessional Health Education
Course topics focusing on interprofessional practice amongst health science professions.
601
Interprofessional Practice in Mental Health
Students from different helping professions come together to examine selected issues of interprofessional practice in the area of mental health and co-occurring addictive disorders, focusing on the experience of mental illness, treatment alternatives, practice implications, advocacy and policy issues, and future challenges and change. Incorporates in-class and field experiences with consumers and families, employers and professionals, services and organizations.
603
Interprofessional Practice in Addictions
Students from different helping professions come together to examine aspects of addictions assessment, treatment and recovery, and issues of co-occurring mental health disorders in an interprofessional context. Studies include the complex array of treatments, programs and supports available in a Canadian context, and critical examination of the ancillary issues of community care, and other support services that are required for successful recovery and relapse prevention for those with addictive disorders and co-occurring mental health issues.
605
Interprofessional Approaches to Assessment, Diagnosis and Treatment in Mental Health and Addictions: The Major Disorders - Part A
Complex facets of assessment and diagnosis (using DSM classification system) of depressive, anxiety, psychotic and alcohol disorders. Team investigation of treatment programs and supports available within a Canadian context.
607
Interprofessional Approaches to Assessment, Diagnosis and Treatment in Mental Health and Addictions: Personality Disorders and Special Populations - Part B
Complex facets of assessment and diagnosis of personality disorders, developmental disorders, special populations and addictive disorders. Team investigation of treatment programs and supports available within a Canadian context.
609
Psychiatric, Psychosocial and Recovery Approaches in Mental Health and Addictions
Interprofessional approaches to culture, relationships, teams and roles in the delivery of mental health and addictions care.
611
Special Topics in Interprofessional Mental Health Addictions
Topics such as age or special populations, methods and systems will be added from existing faculty offerings or will be created as needed through interfaculty collaboration.
Italian
18
201
Beginners' Italian I
This course, designed for students with no previous knowledge of the language, provides training in the comprehension, speaking, reading and writing of Italian.
203
Beginners' Italian II

301
Second-Year Italian I
An intensive course in reading, writing and oral practice.
303
Second-Year Italian II
Further development of communication skills in Italian (listening, speaking, writing, reading), as well as the study of cultural issues in the Italian world with emphasis on reading.
305
Introduction to Textual Analysis
Development of critical thinking and communicative skills through the analysis of selected literary and non literary texts.
307
Communication
Study of different types of communication (print and electronic media, correspondence, business). Analysis of relevant aspects of Italian contemporary life.
309
Civilization: Culture and the Arts
Aspects of Italian civilization and contemporary cultural issues in Italian Studies.
317
Italian Culture and Literature
A survey of Italian culture, inclusive of literary and non-literary texts, film, and popular culture. Topics such as Italian history and immigration, Italian cities, Italian food and fashion, and Italian Canadian literature and traditions, in Calgary and elsewhere are covered.
401
Third-Year Italian I
A course in composition and conversation for advanced students in Italian. Selected readings from literary texts.
403
Third-Year Italian II
Intensive study of Italian grammar with the goal of attaining greater proficiency in written and oral communication. Grammatical analysis, vocabulary enrichment and development of conversation skills dealing with cultural issues.
405
Selected Works in Italian Literature
Introduction to Italian literature with particular emphasis on the novel and poetry.
407
Performance as Cultural Expression
Study of Italian theatre, opera and drama as well as popular forms of cultural expression such as festival, music and figurative art.
409
Italian Culture through Cinema
Significant social, cultural and historical issues in Italian society through the medium of film.
499
Topics in Italian Studies I
Selected topics in Italian language, literature or civilization.
501
Interdisciplinary Study of Italian Culture
Capstone project in Italian studies. Analytical discussion of selected topics each related to students' field of concentration.
502
Advanced Textual Analysis
Discussion of selected topics in Italian language, literature or culture. Course designed to develop writing skills. Review of writing strategies, spelling, punctuation, expository and argumentative techniques, using various original sources taken from journalistic, scientific, and literary texts as well as from other media.
597
Directed Reading
Directed reading for students in their third or fourth year. Qualified students will undertake research projects in their specified field of interest under the supervision of a faculty member.
599
Topics in Italian Studies II
A seminar course for advanced students.
Japanese
19
201
Introduction to Japanese Popular Culture
An introduction to the major forms of popular visual and material culture from Japan in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
205
Beginners' Japanese I
Basic concepts of modern Japanese. Reading and writing of characters, essentials of grammar, basic vocabulary, and oral drills on normal speech patterns.
207
Beginners' Japanese II

301
Continuing Japanese I

303
Continuing Japanese II

309
Topics in Japanese Culture in an Immersion Setting

311
Japanese Language in an Immersion Setting I
Stresses oral skills and cultural understanding in an immersion setting. While the focus will be on speaking and aural comprehension, reading and writing will also be introduced.
313
Japanese Language in an Immersion Setting II

317
Topics in Japanese Civilization

323
Critical Approaches to Manga and Anime
A critical introduction to Japanese manga (print comics) and anime (animation) in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
325
Japanese Video Games and Gaming Culture
A critical introduction to the history, analysis, and social impact of video games from Japan and Japanese gaming culture worldwide.
327
Modern Japanese Literature in Translation
An introduction to the literature and literary history of modern Japan, with readings drawn from various literary genres, from 1868 to the present.
331
Intermediate Japanese I
An intermediate course giving emphasis to both writing and oral skills. Some of the more difficult aspects of modern Japanese grammar will be studied.
333
Intermediate Japanese II

341
Introduction to Japanese Literature
Reading and discussion of selected works of modern Japanese literature.
441
Advanced Conversational Japanese
Intensive development of Japanese oral communication skills through a variety of authentic materials.
451
Japanese Through Contemporary Texts
Language practice and cultural analysis through the study of contemporary Japanese texts. Authentic material will be selected from documents and textbooks. Students will be able to improve their reading skills while enhancing their knowledge of Japanese culture.
461
Japanese-Chinese Cultural Relations
Discussion of cultural relations and influences between Japan and China. Topics may include cultural identities and cross-influences, literary and artistic traditions, and writing systems.
471
Introduction to Classical Japanese
Basic introduction to classical Japanese language, including core grammar structures, sample masterpieces, and handwriting.
Kinesiology
91
201
Activity: Essence and Experience
Participate in various activities and movement patterns and the study of the fundamental factors that influence the activities we choose and the way we move.
203
Activity: Health, Fitness, and Performance
Fundamentals of exercise physiology are used in a variety of theoretically supported activities to experience the benefits of exercise and an understanding of exercise prescription and evaluation.
213
Introduction to Research in Kinesiology
An introduction to research in kinesiology with an emphasis on understanding the research process, including basic statistical knowledge, and its relationship to critical thinking. Practical application of concepts through direct involvement in individual and group projects.
237
Introduction to Nutrition
Provides students with a basic understanding of the role of nutrition in health and fitness.
244
Introduction to Socio-Cultural Aspects of Sport
An introduction to thinking critically about the relationship between sport and the larger social context, with an emphasis on social norms, politics, ethics, and historical perspectives.
251
Introduction to Human Motor Control and Learning
An introduction to principles underlying motor control and learning.
253
Introduction to Exercise and Sport Psychology
An introduction to the psycho-social concepts underlying an understanding of human behaviour in physical activity, sport, and health.
259
Human Anatomy and Physiology I
The instructional approach is a combination of systematic and regional anatomy and physiology with some surface anatomy and radiologic considerations. General cell physiology, bone anatomy, neurophysiology and muscular physiology, as well as skeletal structure, types of connective tissues, structure of joints and muscles of the axial and appendicular skeleton will be covered. Laboratories utilize human tissue materials, anatomical models, charts, and prosected cadavers and cadaver specimens.
260
Human Anatomy and Physiology II
The instructional approach is a combination of systematic and regional anatomy and physiology with some surface anatomy and radiologic considerations. Physiology and anatomy of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, endocrine, renal and gastrointestinal systems as well as anatomy of the reproductive and integumentary systems and special senses will be covered. Laboratories utilize human tissue materials, anatomical models, charts, and prosected cadavers and cadaver specimens.
263
Quantitative Biomechanics
Basic principles of force system analysis, impulse-momentum, work-energy and particle kinematics applied to biological structures, including extensive mathematical analyses.
303
Special Topics in Kinesiology

311
Leadership Foundations
Contemporary leadership best practices with a focus on physical activity, pedagogy and sport coaching. Linking leadership theory with critical reflection.
321
Foundations of Instruction
The fundamental principles of creating an effective learning environment in an instructional activity setting.
323
Integrative Human Physiology
This course builds upon fundamental principles of human systems physiology, with a focus on how the integration of these physiological systems provides the means by which our bodies maintain homeostasis from the systemic down to the cellular level.
330
Flexibility and Relaxation Techniques
Study of joint flexibility, relaxation techniques, and stress management and their importance to physical fitness, human performance, wellness, and health.
331
Foundations of Coaching
The fundamental principles of creating an effective training environment for the developing athlete.
335
Active Living Outdoors
Emphasizing a "fit-for-life" philosophy, this course explores the health providing benefits of selected self-propelled outdoor activities. Students are required to participate in activity experiences on campus.
339
Natural Environments, Wellness, and Health
An exploration of how physical activity in natural, outdoor environments leads to enhanced physical fitness, wellness, and health. Safe practices in these environments will be examined in conjunction with practices that help maintain the ecological integrity of natural and wild environments.
343
Canadian Sport History
The sources and development of sporting activity in Canadian society.
344
Gender, Sexuality, and Sport
Informed by feminist theoretical perspectives, exploring the different ways that sport functions to reproduce and challenge dominant ideas about gender and sexuality.
351
Foundations of Neural Control of Movement
An examination of the nervous system and its role in controlling movement. Emphasis is placed on understanding the basic anatomy and neurophysiology of the central and peripheral nervous systems. Topics include the properties of individual neurons and neural circuits that support human movement. This basic understanding is supplemented by discussion of neurological injuries, diseases and disorders that compromise human movement.
355
Human Growth and Development
The physiological, anatomical, emotional and social changes in human growth and development, with a view to the planning and selection of appropriate programs in physical education, sport, and dance.
363
Biomechanics of Biological Materials
Functional characteristics of muscle, bone, cartilage, tendon, ligament, and joints as they relate to movement and loading of the locomotor system.
365
Sensorimotor Neuroscience
An examination of how human movement is coordinated by the nervous system, beginning with a review of relevant neuroanatomy and neurophysiology. An emphasis is placed on contemporary scientific techniques throughout.
367
Adapted Physical Activity
An examination of specific problems within the psychomotor domain and the related delivery systems for their identification and amelioration.
369
Physical Activity, Health, and Aging
Aging and its impact on neuromotor performance, fitness, health, and patterns of participation in physical activity and recreational pursuits.
371
Scientific Basis of Prevention and Care of Athletic Injuries
Responsibilities of physical educators with respect to their role in the prevention and care of athletic injuries.
372
Foundations of Sport Medicine
An introduction to the common medical issues and injuries that affects the athlete related to sport and exercise.
373
Exercise Physiology
The physiology of muscular exercise, physical conditioning, and training. The course will cover aspects of the nervous, muscular, cardiovascular, and respiratory systems and also present the material in the context of the effects of exercise on an integrated system. Short- and long-term adaptations to exercise will be examined relative to health and human activity.
375
Tests and Measurements in Kinesiology
Establishment of tests, criteria for selection of tests, measurement devices used to evaluate physiological status, human growth, and skill levels in physical activity programs.
377
Sport Injury Prevention
Concepts of sport injury prevention, basic research design and methods used in prevention research, multifactorial nature of sport injury and development and plan to apply the fundamentals of sport injury including primary, secondary and tertiary prevention.
381
Computer Applications in Kinesiology
An introduction to the use of the computer in kinesiology which involves hands-on experiences with selected software packages.
391
Practicum I
Practical experiences with children and youth in instructional programs of physical activity.
393
Research Seminar I
Students attend, discuss, and critique a series of research seminars in the Human Performance Laboratory.
395
Research Seminar II
Students attend, discuss, and critique a series of research seminars in the Human Performance Laboratory.
397
Health and Exercise Psychology
An examination of psychological issues related to health, exercise, and physical activity.
399
Sport Psychology
An analysis of personality and social psychological variables affecting the athlete/coach in the context of sport.
403
Health Promotion
Exploration of the relationships between health, disease, and the benefits associated with physical activity and the various factors that can promote and maintain healthy lifestyle change.
413
Motivation in Physical Activity, Exercise and Sport
Concepts related to motivation in physical activity, sport, and exercise settings. Antecedents, consequences, and processes of motivated behaviour are examined from theoretical, empirical, and applied perspectives.
420
Work Term in Kinesiology
Extensive unpaid work term focused on experiential learning in the field of kinesiology. Students must spend a total of 35-40 hours per week for 12-13 weeks in a workplace setting.
431
The Art of Coaching
Advanced principles of the art of effective coaching.
433
Health and Physical Activity
Exploration of the relationships between health, disease, and the benefits associated with physical activity and the various factors that can promote and maintain lifestyle change. Students will be required to complete a personal health report based on the following laboratory components: (1) blood lipid profile (a fasting blood draw), (2) nutritional record (dietary record analyzed), (3) health risk analysis (an online risk assessment) and risk factor concept (summary 1 - 3 with the inclusion of family/genetic background).
435
Volleyball Coaching Theory

437
Advanced Nutrition
An examination of current nutritional strategies for sport performance and diet-related chronic diseases. Critical analysis of a wide variety of dietary supplements will be included.
441
Practicum A
Unpaid practicum placement focused on experiential learning in the field of Kinesiology.  Students are required to complete 60 to 72 hours in a workplace setting, distributed evenly over the duration of the term.
443
Practicum B
Practicum placement in kinesiology or related field.
444
Critical Perspectives on the Body
Critical considerations of the relationship between the body and historical, cultural, and political context.
445
Practicum C
Practicum placement in kinesiology or related field.
451
Advanced Topics in Human Motor Control and Learning
A comprehensive examination of the nervous system and its role in learning and controlling movements. Topics include the properties of individual neurons and neural circuits and how their function is altered by motor learning. The course also covers contemporary methods and theories used to understand how humans learn and perform motor actions.
460
Laboratory Practicum: Anatomy
Detailed planning and anatomical dissection of human cadavers.
463
Advanced Techniques in Biomechanics
Exploring basic concepts of analysis and modelling in biomechanics, including numerical implementation and solution.
465
Adaptation to Environmental Stress
Physiological effects of temperature and humidity fluctuations; principles of heat generation, conservation and transfer; acute and chronic effects of hypo and hyperbarometric pressures; special dietary considerations; and associated physio-psychological implications will be examined.
466
Biomechanics Research Project
A capstone course where students assimilate their knowledge by designing and conducting a biomechanics research project.
469
Topics in Sport Medicine
An examination of current medical topics in sport medicine as they relate to the athlete. The topics will include common medical problems and drugs in sport.
475
Physiology of Athletic Performance
The physiological factors and principles of training affecting performance will be reviewed and challenged on the scientific basis of experimental evidence.
479
Advanced Fitness Appraisal and Exercise Prescription
Advanced knowledge and skills necessary to assess physical fitness status of apparently healthy individuals, including cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength and endurance, body composition, and flexibility. Interpretation of fitness test results, development of appropriate exercise prescriptions, and communication skills necessary for effective counselling.
485
Skeletal Muscle Properties
The structural organization, neural control, contractile consequences, and determinants of energy cost of contraction of skeletal muscle will be studied in detail.
487
The Olympic Games
A critical analysis of the modern Olympic Games.
490
Interpretation of Research and Research Project
Instruction in critical enquiry, critical appraisal, research design, and includes the successful completion of an independent research project in publication format.
491
Practicum II
Additional practical experiences with children and youth in instructional programs of physical activity.
493
Epidemiology of Health and Physical Activity
An examination of physical activity/disease relationships through application of population-based methods including research design and interpretation of studies. The content will assist the student in identifying the quality and extent of research supporting the relationships between health, disease, and habitual physical activity and fitness.
495
Physiological Aspects of Aging, Disease, and Physical Activity
An examination of the interaction between aging, age-associated disease (e.g., cardiovascular disease) and physical activity. The major emphasis will be on the physiological processes involved.
497
Cancer and Exercise Research and Reviews
Examination of current literature and issues in cancer and exercise research.
499
Applied Sport Psychology
Focus on applied sport psychology techniques and strategies to optimize performance, with the intent to bridge sport psychology related research with professional practice.
503
Special Topics in Kinesiology
An examination of selected special topics in kinesiology and related subjects.
504
Directed Study
Intensive self-directed study of selected topics in Kinesiology.
569
Rehabilitation Through Recreational Activities
Issues of planning and implementing recreation, health, and wellness programs for persons with disability including advocacy, planning principles, creativity, learning techniques, and teamwork.
593
Senior Practicum
An opportunity for students to gain personalized, applied research and/or work experience in kinesiology or related fields.
603
Special Topics
Intensive study of selected topics in human physical activity and related subjects as follows: Applied Sport Psychology; Biomechanics; Cognitive Science: Vision and Motor Behaviour; Exercise and Health Physiology; Health and Exercise Psychology; Motor Learning; Multi-Media Applications in Learning; Neuro-Motor Psychology; Nutrition, Metabolism and Genetics; Sport and Exercise Psychology; Sport History; Sport Medicine; Sport Sociology.
604
Directed Study
Intensive self-directed study of selected topics in Kinesiology.
605
Nutrition for Performance and Active Living
Nutritional requirements for sport performance and active living, including an overview of basic nutritional principles. Designed to use current research findings as a basis to examine the role of nutrition in sport performance. Nutrition for an active lifestyle will also be examined.
606
Practical Skills for Applied Exercise Physiology
To develop practical skill and techniques associated with applied exercise physiological measurement vs. measurements in the areas of body composition, cardiorespiratory and musculoskeletal fitness.
609
Statistical Techniques in Kinesiology
Basic concepts of statistical analysis as they apply to research methods used in various disciplines in kinesiology.
610
Qualitative Research Analysis
An introduction to qualitative research. Emphasis will be placed on critically evaluating qualitative literature, designing and conducting qualitative research, and qualitative analysis.
611
Research Methods in Kinesiology
An overview of research methods including study design, data collection, measurement, interpretation of data, scientific writing, and critical appraisal of the literature relevant to kinesiology.
615
Seminar in Applied Exercise Physiology I
Lectures and seminar presentations, discussion and critique of current research in applied exercise physiology and related subjects.
617
Seminar in Applied Exercise Physiology II
Lectures and seminar presentations, discussion and critique of current research in applied exercise physiology and related subjects. Focus on chronic disease.
637
Nutrition for Physically Active Populations
The nutritional requirements of specific athletic and/or physically active groups such as cardiac rehabilitation patients and child athletes.
663
Advanced Muscle Mechanics and Physiology
A look at problems associated within muscle mechanics and contractility. Also the use of muscle mechanics as a scientific discipline to critically learn and evaluate the scientific process. Basic anatomy and physiology of muscle contraction including the cross-bridge theory, and the force-length, force-velocity and force-time relationships of actively and passively contracting muscles will also be covered.
664
Bone and Joint Biomechanics
An examination of bone and joint biomechanics as they relate to bone fracture, joint injuries, and diseases with an emphasis on osteoarthritis. Basic bone, ligament, cartilage, and muscle structure and function will be discussed in the context of healthy tissues and in aging, disease, and post-trauma. Animal models of disease are explored.
673
Exercise Physiology
Topics in exercise physiology will include the effects of exercise on muscle, metabolism, hormones, respiration, and the cardiovascular system. Nutrition, body composition, ergogenic aids, and environmental factors will also be examined.
691
Practicum I
The practicum will consist of multiple experiences in applied physiology environments.
692
Practicum II
The practicum will consist of multiple experiences in applied physiology environments.
697
Exercise and Sport Psychology
Addresses the determinants and consequences of exercise and sport engagement within clinical and athletic populations. The focus will be on the translation of research to practice, with hands-on skills and effective practice guidelines shared with the students.
703
Special Topics
Intensive study of selected topics in Kinesiology as follows: Applied Sport Psychology; Biomechanics; Exercise and Health Physiology; Health and Exercise Psychology; Motor Learning; Multi-Media Applications in Learning; Neuro-Motor Psychology; Nutrition, Metabolism and Genetics; Physiology of Skeletal Muscle; Sport and Exercise Psychology; Sport History; Sport Medicine; Sport Sociology.
704
Directed Study
Intensive self-directed study of selected topics in Kinesiology.
715
Seminar in Applied Exercise Physiology III
An advanced level of presentation and critical appraisal of research in applied physiology. Students will assume a leadership role in a seminar setting.
717
Seminar in Applied Exercise Physiology IV
An advanced level of presentation and critical appraisal of research in applied physiology. Students will assume a leadership role in a seminar setting.
773
Integrative Exercise Physiology
The effects of exercise on the complex physiological interactions between different systems in the human body.
775
Clinical Exercise Physiology
Exercise for clinical populations: exercise assessment and prescription for disease modification.
785
Training Strategies for Health and Sport
The science of improving health and athletic performance with appropriate periodized stress and recovery.
Language
10
200
Introduction to Second Language Learning
Introduction to the process of language learning with a focus on the development of learning strategies. Specific examples will be drawn from ancient and modern languages offered at the University of Calgary.
300
Introduction to Translation Studies
Basics of translation theory and practice for students with sufficient second language background. Establishes a common critical vocabulary to discuss issues in translation.
400
Advanced Translation Studies
An in-depth study of the field of translation with a focus on the notions of aesthetics, comparative stylistics, grammar, and literary forms. The applied focus of the course will be on a high-quality translation along with a critical reflection on its production.
451
Cross-Cultural and Cross-Linguistic Explorations
Cross-cultural and cross-linguistic comparisons of events, cultural patterns or phenomena, historical periods, or social movements with parallels in multi-cultural traditions.
500
Cross-Cultural and Cross-Linguistic Research Projects
Cross-linguistic and -cultural analysis through group projects focusing on case studies.
599
Topics in the Study of Language
Topics will reflect developments in current research in second language acquisition and learning.
605
Second Language Learning and Pedagogy
Theoretical and practical overview of the processes involved in acquiring a second language, with a focus on naturalistic language acquisition and on classroom strategies and classroom language learning.
615
Second Language Learning and Technology
Theoretical and practical aspects of incorporating technology into the language classroom. A general overview in the context of theories of second language acquisition of using the web, electronic mail, online chat discussion, and videoconferencing as tools in language teaching/learning; students will also learn to create their own websites and web activities for teaching.
625
Second Language Learning and Cultural Understanding
An introduction to the interdisciplinary nature of "culture" as it pertains to second language teaching and learning.
699
Research Seminar in Second Language Learning
Centred round a professor's current research project, the course will engage students as members of a collaborative research team that will serve as a practical exposure to research methods in the area of second language learning and acquisition.
Languages, Literatures and Cultures
6
600
Introduction to Graduate Studies in Languages, Literatures and Cultures
An introduction to research and professional skills. Students will learn about and apply skills in research information sources, including the library; source citation; grant and conference proposal writing; presenting research in a range of venues; and preparing for a diversified job market.
601
Additional Language Pedagogy
An introduction to the field of second language teaching and learning with a historical overview of the field. Presents concepts from the related fields of applied linguistics, psychology and education. Students will have the opportunity to observe university language courses, analyze language textbooks, and develop a statement of teaching philosophy.
602
Research Methods in Applied Linguistics
An overview of theory and research methods with a focus on empirical research in the field of applied linguistics. Students will read and critique recent studies, develop research questions, and explore ways in which to answer their questions.
603
Theory and Methods of Literary and Cultural Studies
Examines theories and approaches in literary, cultural and film criticism. Students will develop research questions and explore ways in which to answer these questions as they relate to cultural artefacts (literary and filmic) in languages other than English.
612
Topics in Applied Linguistics
An introduction to research in a specific area of applied linguistics.
614
Topics in Transcultural Studies
An introduction to research in a specific area of transcultural studies.
Latin
13
201
Latin I
This course for beginners provides the first steps towards reading Latin texts.
203
Latin II

205
The Latin of Science I
An introduction to Latin through ancient, medieval and modern scientific texts, designed for students in the Sciences and Engineering.
207
The Latin of Science II

301
Latin III
Completes the study of basic grammar, vocabulary and translation skills.
303
Intermediate Readings in Classical and Post-Classical Texts

401
Readings in Latin Prose
Readings will normally be selected according to genres, such as Historiography, Oratory, Philosophic and Didactic Prose, the Novel, Epigraphy.
403
Readings in Latin Poetry
Readings will normally be selected according to genres, such as Epic, Drama, Lyric, and Satire.
551
Directed Studies in Latin
Readings may be selected from any genre of Latin at an advanced level.
601
Graduate Seminar

602
Introductory Language Class for Graduate Students
Introduction to grammar, vocabulary and translation skills.
604
Intermediate Language Class for Graduate Students
Consolidation of grammar, vocabulary and translation skills.
607
Directed Studies

Latin American Studies
6
211
Latin America: People, Places and Popular Culture
An introduction to Latin America, one of the most diverse and dynamic regions in the world. What is the origin of this diversity? How does this diversity manifest itself in today’s places and cultures? An interdisciplinary approach is taken to answering these questions, as the course material integrates archaeology, history, political science, economics, geography, anthropology, and cultural studies to introduce students to the region.
301
Field Study in Latin America
An experiential learning course, designed to provide a framework for the student's empirical learning experience during the Latin American Studies Field School. Provides a forum for the sharing of cross-cultural experiences among the students, as they analyze and reflect on the realities of life in Latin America. Students will be expected to live with a local family during the Field School, to take an active part in discussions, and to participate in events and field trips.
303
Latin American Field Research
In a Latin American field setting, this course guides students in integrating their own observations and experiences with scholarly readings on themes of relevance and importance to the particular setting. Attention is paid to the archaeological and historical contexts as well as present day economic, political, and social issues of Latin America. The regional and theoretical focus of the material will vary according to the location at which the course is given.
311
Critical Contemporary Issues in Latin America
An analysis of critical issues that provides students with a framework for understanding Latin America today. Examines themes of contemporary importance, which may include human rights, indigenous issues, energy, the environment, democratization, poverty and inequality, social movements, migration, and the region’s relationship with the United States.
401
Integrative Seminar in Latin American Studies
An advanced seminar involving research on a special Latin American topic integrating a variety of disciplinary and interdisciplinary perspectives (e.g. political science, anthropology, geography, cultural studies).
501
Directed Study in Latin American Studies
Students devise a research question and carry out a program of independent research with a specialist on a topic in the area of Latin American Studies.
Law
111
400
Constitutional Law
The basic elements of Canadian constitutional law. The nature of constitutions and constitutional processes; principles of constitutional interpretation; constitutional amendment; Federal-Provincial distribution of legislative powers including the federal general power, natural resources and public property, provincial property and civil rights, trade and commerce, provincial taxation, transportation, communications, and criminal law; the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms including principles of limitation, remedies, interpretation, application, fundamental freedoms, democratic and language rights, mobility rights, legal rights, equality rights, and aboriginal people's rights.
402
Contracts
A legal and policy analysis of the basic principles and fundamental concepts of the law of contracts as they relate to commercial and consumer transactions. The formation of contracts including offer and acceptance, and consideration; estoppel; privity; terms of contract, including exemption clauses; standard form contracts; bailment; mistake, misrepresentation and unconscionability; termination, including the doctrine of frustration; breach and remedies for breach; dispute resolution processes. Emphasis is placed not only on a knowledge of rules and principles, their historical derivation, rationale, efficacy and social validity, but also upon their creative use to both avoid and resolve disputes.
403
Legislation
The fundamentals of the legislative process: policy development, legislative drafting, public bill processes, statutory interpretation. The interaction of law and policy in the development of legislation and statutory interpretation. Substantive law connections are made with other first year courses. The functions of the lawyer within these processes are examined, including issues of professional responsibility. The course is taught through performance-based learning methods with emphasis on drafting.
404
Property
An examination of the fundamental concepts of property law and the types of property interests recognized by Anglo-Canadian law. The historical evolution of property concepts; the basic concepts of possession, ownership and title; estates and other interests in land such as joint and concurrent ownership, easements, covenants, licences, mortgages, future interests and perpetuities; the landlord and tenant relationship; the land titles system of registration of title to land; the social constraints upon property use and disposition; and property rights of aboriginal peoples.
406
Torts
An analysis and critique of the law of torts, primarily the law of negligence, with personal injury as the main focus, although other torts will also be introduced. The nature of tort law and its process; an anatomy of the law of negligence - the nature and extent of liability, defences, remedies, and the assessment of damages; intentional torts; economic torts; strict liability; bailment; the impact of private insurance on the tort system; alternative forms of compensation.
407
Foundations in Law and Justice I
An introduction to: legal methods, systems and institutions; sources of law; legal and judicial reasoning; legal analysis, including case analysis and problem-solving skills; critical perspectives on the law, including legal theory and history; the role of the lawyer in system(s) of laws; access to justice. The course is taught on an intensive basis in the first three weeks of law school to provide students with foundational analytical and critical skills for the subsequent curriculum, and using performance-based learning methods.
408
Foundations in Law and Justice II
The fundamentals of legal research, writing, communication and advocacy, including: developing research strategies; identification and assessment of legal and non-legal information appropriate to a legal problem or issue; drafting of memorandum and/or facta; oral advocacy, including mooting; legal communication, including client interviewing and counselling. This course is taught on an intensive basis in the first three weeks of Winter Term using performance-based learning methods.
410
Crime: Law and Procedure
An anatomy of criminal conduct and the law's treatment of it utilizing a limited range of criminal offences. The designation of human conduct as criminal and a consideration of the social, cultural and political forces involved; the development of the criminal process in English common law, its translation to Canada and embodiment in the Criminal Code; the substantive elements of a criminal offence including both the physical and mental elements; the common law and code defences; procedural, tactical, ethical and evidential problems associated with criminal prosecution at both the pre-trial and trial stages; the sentencing process; the position at law of the victim.
503
Administrative Law
This course introduces students to the general structure of administrative decision-making in Canada: how public administrators obtain power and how that power is exercised both at the level of individual adjudication and at the level of the establishment of public policy. It also introduces students to the checks which courts place on the exercise of administrative power. The course discusses the procedures that courts require of administrative agencies and public officials as well as the substantive grounds on which courts may review the decisions of administrative agencies and public officials.
505
Civil Procedure
A detailed examination of issues which arise in the progress of a civil action from first meeting the client through to judgment in the Alberta Court of Queen's Bench. The Alberta Rules of Court are set in the context of the values underlying them. What sort of civil litigation system do we want? What sort of system do we in fact have? Particular attention if paid to the linkages between the apparently discrete components of the process as set out in the Rules, linkages at the levels of both the underlying values and of actual practice. The use of procedures under the Rules to anticipate and resolve evidence problems that might arise at trial is stressed. Interprovincial and international aspect of the civil litigation process are also considered.
507
Evidence
An examination of the fundamental concept of evidence law, including the traditional rules as compared to the emerging principled approach, and such core and primary topics as: the adversary system; relevance and discretionary exclusion; privilege; burdens of proof; character evidence; judicial notice; competence and compellability; examination of witnesses; hearsay; opinion evidence.
508
Negotiation
Instruction in dispute resolution theory and practice with a focus on negotiation, mediation and topics such as collaborative law and judicial dispute resolution, and application of those processes to a substantive area of law. Taught in a three week intensive format through performance-based learning methods. Evaluation will include a mock negotiation and written exercises such as the preparation of a client-advising memo in the substantive area.
509
Business Associations
The common forms of business organization, including the law of agency, partnerships, limited partnerships, and societies and corporations, with a focus on the corporation and the rights and responsibilities of shareholders and directors. Topics will include fiduciary relationships in a commercial context.
510
Ethical Lawyering
An introduction to issues of legal ethics and professional responsibility. Students should become competent at ethical reasoning in the context of legal practice. To achieve this goal the course covers selected topic in the "law of lawyering" (e.g. the Law Society of Alberta's Code of Professional Conduct) but also address the general question of what it means to be an ethical lawyer. Students are expected to develop their awareness of the various moral values underlying the legal system, and to practice how to weigh and apply those values, and the law of lawyering, to ethical problems. The course also covers selected topics relating to the regulation of lawyers' ethics.
511
Criminal Process
A survey and critical examination of core aspects of criminal process law. A focus on legislation relating to jurisdiction and modes of trial including obligations of and options available to prosecution and accused. Other topics include arrest, search and seizure, investigative detention, and right to counsel and silence, all within the context of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
515
Family Law
An analysis of the legal principles affecting the rights and responsibilities of the members of the family. Topics include constitutional issues, marriage, marriage contracts, common law marriage, child neglect and abuse, custody and access, guardianship, adoption, separation, divorce, nullity, spousal and child maintenance, and matrimonial property. Stress is placed on the process of family law and the appropriate role for lawyers and judges.
519
Jurisprudence
A critical inquiry into the nature and functions of law and justice, including natural law, legal positivism, sociological jurisprudence, legal realism, and contemporary theorists.
521
Real Estate Transactions
An examination of the estate transactions. Topics include the purchase and sale of property, mortgaging and other ways to finance land transactions, commercial leasing arrangements, and the Land Titles Act as it relates to land development.
525
Bankruptcy and Restructuring Law
Receivership, consumer and commercial arrangements and bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Act and the Company Creditors Arrangements Act.
527
Basic Tax Law
The basic language and concepts of taxation and identification of taxation issues. Topics include the unit of taxation, the meaning and taxation of income, taxation of benefits, the type and scope of deductions available for business income, and the taxation of capital gains including gains (and losses) on taxpayer assets.
529
Biotechnology and the Law
The legal, ethical, and policy issues relating to biotechnology. Topics include genetically modified foods, animals and plants, synthetic genomics, animal-human combinations, xenotransplantation, human cloning, pharmacogenetics, biofuels, assisted human reproduction, stem cells, tissue engineering, genetic therapy, and genetic enhancement.
530
Mining Law
The law governing the exploration, financing and development of minerals in Canada. Topics include mining legislation; title; aboriginal rights, including the duty to consult; environmental obligations; mining agreements; and, international transactions
531
Environmental Law
Legal theories, concepts, principles, and processes relevant to environmental protection. Topics include ecological and ethical dimensions, jurisdictional issues, common law rights and remedies, environmental assessment, public participation, contaminated sites, enforcement and compliance, economic approaches, endangered species and protected spaces, land use planning, and environmental dispute resolution.
533
Wills and Estates
The preparation, execution, interpretation, and administration of wills; testamentary capacity; alteration, revocation and republication of wills; intestate succession; dependants' relief; and estate administration.
535
Secured Transactions
The modern law of secured transactions and the financing of personal property, with a focus on Alberta's Personal Property Security Act. Other topics include Bank Act security, the Farm Implement Act, and the Fair Trading Act.
536
International Criminal Law
The law related to international and transnational crimes.  Topics may include crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide, aggression, extradition, terrorism, human trafficking, drug trafficking, cybercrime, state sovereignty and impunity, money laundering, and organized crime.
537
Sale of Goods
The sale and supply of goods, including an examination of the provincial Sale of Goods Act, consumer protection issues, and the Vienna International Sales Convention.
543
Intellectual Property Law
Intellectual property, including the law of patents, copyrights, and trade-marks.
547
Human Rights Law
A survey of national and provincial human rights laws and practice as distinct from the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and an introduction to the main international and transnational human rights instruments and standards.
549
International Law
The elements of public international law, including sources, the role of customary law, the law of treaties, recognition, state responsibility, and the roles and powers of international organizations.
551
Unjust Enrichment
Unjust enrichment as an independent source of legal obligation. Topics include elements of the right of action and defences; restitution as the remedy, with particular emphasis on personal versus proprietary restitution; and disgorgement of wrongful gain, distinguished from restitution using breach of fiduciary obligation as the primary example.
553
Insurance Law
The various types of insurance (e.g. fire, life, sickness and accident, motor vehicle, and liability). Topics include the nature and formation of the insurance contract, the role of insurance agents, insurable interest, misrepresentation and non-disclosure, and the rights of third parties against the insurer.
557
Commercial Arbitration Law
Private (between individuals) and mixed (investor/state) arbitration. Coverage includes domestic and international arbitration rules, including UNCITRAL and International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) rules.
559
Critical Legal Theories
An examination of critical theoretical perspectives on the nature and functions of law, and of the possibilities and limitations of law as a strategy for social change. Perspectives may include feminist legal theories, critical race theories, post-colonial theories, Aboriginal legal theories, critical disability theories, queer theories, and post-modernism.
561
Employment Law
The law governing non-unionized workplaces in Canada. Topics include constitutional jurisdiction, defining the employment relationship and employer/employee status, the employment contract, implied rights and obligations, termination, reasonable notice of dismissal, constructive dismissal, cause for summary dismissal, human rights, and employment standards legislation.
563
International Human Rights and Humanitarian Law
International human rights law, covering the main global instruments (such as the International Covenants, as well as the regional human rights systems of the Americas and Europe), with an introduction to the principles and concepts of International Humanitarian Law. Topics include women’s human rights, death penalty, massive human rights violations, human rights and counter-terrorism, the rights of the child, the rights of indigenous peoples and minorities, and the role of non-state actors.
565
Internet Law
The Internet as a technology, a place for social interaction, and a marketplace. Topics include Internet governance, network neutrality, end to end and layered principles, the domain name system, peer production and distribution, information security and privacy, ISP regulation, regulation of Internet content, electronic commerce, VOIP regulation, and anti-circumvention law.
567
Law and Economics
An examination of the practical and theoretical implications arising from the application of economic reasoning to law. Topics include the economic method of legal analysis, the scope of its application, and the major critical responses in both traditional legal fields of economic influence (such as tort, contract and corporate law) and more novel areas (such as family and criminal law).
569
Law and Literature
The ways in which literary studies inform law and legal analysis, and the ways in which law and legal themes have informed literature.
571
Oil and Gas Law
The upstream oil and gas industry. Topics include ownership of oil and gas and split estates; coalbed methane; the legal character of the private oil and gas lease; the anatomy of the various clauses of the oil and gas lease; and Crown disposition systems, including the Alberta (conventional and oil sands) and federal legislation and related policy question.
573
Public Lands and Natural Resources Law
The protection, exploitation, and management of Crown-owned lands and renewable and non-renewable natural resources (other than oil and gas, and including forestry, rangeland, minerals, wildlife, fisheries, wilderness, recreational, and heritage). Discussion of the nature of public ownership, public and private values, economic approaches, and inter-jurisdictional management.
575
Remedies
Judicial remedies at common law and equity for tort and breach of contract, including personal injury and property damage. Themes include compensating loss, disgorging gain, and punishing civil wrong; prohibiting and compelling defendant behaviour; loss-based, gain-based, and punitive damages; and injunctions and specific performance.
577
Tax Policy
Principles of tax policy (efficiency, equity, and simplicity) and applications related to income, sales, and payroll taxes. Topics include the economic and distributive effects of taxes, auditing and legal compliance, and political economy.
579
Legal Theory, Selected Topics
Critical examination of the main theoretical writings in a major doctrinal area or group of doctrinal areas, such as private law (tort, contract and unjust enrichment); public law (criminal, Constitutional and administrative law); tort; contract; evidence; property; Constitutional; or criminal law.
581
Unsecured Creditors’ Remedies
The remedies available to the unsecured creditor for the collection of debts and the protections offered to debtors, including prejudgment remedies, garnishment, execution against real and personal property, fraudulent preferences and conveyances, and the regulation of collection and credit agencies.
583
Water Law
Water resources and management, including the historical and current legal and policy frameworks governing surface and groundwater rights. Topics include responses to scarcity, alternative water management models and plans, industrial use and re-use of water, wetlands, protection of aquatic resources, aboriginal water rights, economic instruments, water as a human right, watershed approaches, and inter-jurisdictional or international issues.
585
Alberta Court of Appeal Moots
The development of appellate advocacy and other lawyering skills in the context of preparation for and participation in the Alberta Court of Appeal Moot, in the areas of criminal law; civil law (contract, property or tort law); and constitutional law.
587
Kawaskimhon National Aboriginal Moot
The development of advocacy, consensus building, and other lawyering skills in the context of a non-competitive moot conducted in a circle arrangement and using a moot problem based on contemporary issues in Aboriginal-Government relations. Includes a writing requirement.
589
Labour Arbitration Moot
The development of advocacy and other lawyering skills in the context of preparation for and participation in an arbitration conducted under a collective agreement. Includes a writing requirement.
591
Provincial Court Clerkships
Placements in the Provincial Court performing research, preparing memoranda, and meeting and discussing with a supervising Judge.
593
Health Law
The regulation, structure, and financing of the health care system. Topics include licensing and regulation of health care professionals (including medical malpractice claims as a form of regulation); regulation of biomedical research; approval processes for drugs; complementary therapies and medical devices; resource allocation and access to health care; market considerations; privatization and deregulation of health care; and consent and confidentiality.
594
Indigenous Peoples and the Law
The law governing the relationship between indigenous peoples and settler society. Topics include recognition of aboriginal laws and custom, self-determination and other applicable principles of international law, self-government, common law recognition of aboriginal title, treaties, the honour of the Crown, the fiduciary duty of the Crown, the Crown’s duty of consultation and accommodation, constitutional protection of aboriginal and treaty rights, application of provincial laws, the Indian Act, land surrenders, and exemptions from seizure and taxation.
595
Canadian Legal History
Migration of European law in the colonial context and its impact in pre-Confederation Canada (settled and conquered colonies); the role of trading companies, particularly the Hudson’s Bay Company; the impact of the United States both before and after Confederation; Confederation and the development of Canadian legal culture and law. Jurisdictions may include British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, and Nova Scotia.
596
Feminist Legal Theory
A critical inquiry into the nature and function of law from a variety of different perspectives within feminist legal theory. Topics include the role of rights and of legal discourse, and the possibilities and limitations of law as a strategy for social transformation.
597
International Trade Law
The public law framework for international trade, with emphasis on the WTO and NAFTA. Topics include national treatment, most favoured nation treatment, anti-dumping and countervail actions, and dispute resolution.
598
Trusts
The concept of the trust and its development in equity and its relationship to other legal concepts. Topics include the various types of trusts; constituting, administering and terminating the trust; trustee duties and powers; variation of trusts; breach of trust; and the doctrine of tracing.
599
Legal Practice, Selected Topics
A variety of subject matters related to the practice of law.
601
Advanced Criminal Law
An in-depth examination of case authorities, primarily through an examination of case authorities, certain concepts in criminal law the understanding of which is essential for a criminal practitioner Topics covered may include mens rea, sexual offences, assault, sentencing, conspiracy, driving offences, and identification.
602
Advocacy
A development of core competencies through the practice of advocacy. Each student will apply legal knowledge, critical analysis, communication and resolution skills as well as ethical understanding, to trial fundamentals situated in real trial scenarios. Participants will choose to represent parties in either a civil or criminal trial.
605
Oil and Gas Contracts
Selected problems in oil and gas law including industry contracts (pooling, farmout, joint operating, purchase and sale and royalty agreements); fiduciary duties; and title review.
607
Advanced Legal Research
This course builds on legal research instruction in the first year of the program and affords further opportunities to learn and practice research skills. The course provides instruction in research methodology, citation, print and electronic research/databases, covering case law, statute law, texts, periodicals and web-based materials.
612
Advanced Private Law
Advanced issues in private law (property, contract, tort, unjust enrichment and equity), including contemporary controversies over appropriate rights and remedies when different causes of action either converge or intersect.
613
Conflict of Laws

615
Advanced Civil Procedure
The strategic use of the Alberta Rules of Court in civil proceedings with reference to related legislation and ethical requirements. Topics include commencement of proceedings, interlocutory and ex parte applications, discovery of persons and records, trial preparation, and the roles of the court.
617
Alternative Energy Law: Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
The renewable energy and energy efficiency sectors. Topics include federalism, wind, small hydro, solar, biomass etc., energy conservation and demand side management, and access to energy infrastructure.
618
Corporate Finance Law
Legal aspects of corporate finance transactions, including applicable regulatory frameworks. Topics may include equity and debt financing, secured transactions, assess and/or share purchase and sale agreements, and takeover bids.
619
Estate Planning
Personal dispositions of property, both inter vivos and on death, to achieve estate and succession planning objectives. Topics include trusts, corporations, wills, life insurance, buy-sell arrangements, income splitting, estate freezing, and tax deferral plans.
621
Corporate Governance and Litigation
The principal concepts in corporate governance and their evolution in Canada; the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and the related rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and the New York Stock Exchange; the securities regulatory response of Canada to the adoption of Sarbanes-Oxley in the United States; and other current topics in corporate governance.
623
Environmental Impact Assessment Law
Environmental impact assessment (EIA) law and practice in Canada. Topics include the role of EIA in the regulatory process and as a planning tool, federalism, triggers, equivalency, harmonization, joint assessment, implementation of assessment decisions, adaptive management, strategic environmental assessment, the role of traditional knowledge, and public participation.
624
Environmental Law and Ethics
The ethical underpinning of environmental law, with a consideration of various views, including the land ethic, deep and shallow ecology, instrumental and utilitarian approaches, and inherent value.
625
Intellectual Property Transactions
Intellectual property transactions and strategies in a variety of industries in energy, information technology, and life sciences. Topics include open source IP, IP governance, management and best practices, valuation, ownership, improvements, co-ownership and collaboration, patent pools and standard setting organizations, software licensing and IT transactions, licensing, infringement management, and warranties.
626
International Development Law
The role of law in promoting social and economic growth, with a focus on the rule of law as an instrument of development and the dialogue between the developed and less developed worlds through international agreements. Topics include the rules of international trade and finance, intellectual property, the environment and natural resources, and the war on terrorism.
627
International Environmental Law
The customary and treaty law rules applicable to global and transboundary environmental issues. Topics include air pollution, climate change, international wildlife law and trade, the international chemicals agreements liability regimes, and shared resources.
628
International Investment Law
Investor protection in customary law and treaties, in particular NAFTA Chapter 11, bilateral investment treaties (BITs), and the Energy Charter; the main disciplines, including national treatment, most favoured nation treatment, fair and equitable treatment, and the rules pertaining to expropriation; soft law norms pertaining to investment; and relevant domestic law, including the Investment Canada Act.
630
International Petroleum Transactions
International business transactions in the context of the petroleum industry, including the various forms of state agreements; confidentiality agreements; study and bidding agreements; international joint operating agreements; agency agreements; and participation agreements; with attention to the key legal, business and ethical issues raised in negotiations.
631
International Tax Law
The tax implications of both inbound and outbound investment and implications for structuring affiliates, with consideration of international tax treaties and foreign tax credit mechanisms.
634
Law of Species and Spaces
The principal federal and provincial laws governing the management of biological diversity, including protected area legislation and endangered species legislation. Explores the constitutional and common law fundamentals of wildlife law as well as contemporary disputes about species protection, ecosystem-level land management, and game ranch operations.
636
Municipal Law
The legal position of local governments, including cities and regional governments. Topics include the powers of Municipal Councils and Districts, the duties and responsibilities of elected and appointed municipal officials, conflicts of interest, elections, the regulation and licensing of businesses, proprietary and contractual powers, tort and the public body, subdivision, land use planning, and the role of the courts.
637
Energy Law
An overview of energy regulation, focusing on competition and pricing. Topics include the theory and process of energy regulation, regulatory jurisdiction, judicial review of energy regulation, regulation of natural gas and electricity prices, market restructuring, and deregulation. The course will familiarize students with the legal issues that arise when the legislature and regulators respond to market failures, and/or protect the public interest, in the provision of natural gas and electricity services.
641
Oil and Gas and Mining Taxation
The resource regime rules of the Income Tax Act as applied to the oil and gas and mining sectors. Topics include: operations subject to the resource regime; the treatment of property costs and common industry expenditures (i.e. applicable "tax pools" and their characteristics): resource industry "subsidies" (e.g. flow-through share financing, investment tax credits); the avoidance provisions (e.g. the successor rules); and the treatment of foreign operations of a Canadian resident taxpayer.
645
Pollution Control and Waste Management Law
The provincial and federal pollution control regimes for air and water pollution and for the handling, storage, treatment, and disposal of hazardous and non-hazardous wastes. Topics include federalism; regulatory and non-regulatory approaches to pollution from “point” and “non-point” sources; cumulative pollutant loads; the “precautionary” and “polluter pays” principles; and liability for contaminated sites.
647
Regulatory Theory and the Law
The main theories that explain or justify government regulation, including correction for market failure, political economy or public choice, and deliberative democracy. The relationship between those theories and the development and implementation of regulatory legislation, regulation, and public policy.
648
Securities Law
The regulation of capital market participants; the issuance of, and trades in, securities of companies, with an emphasis on Alberta and the National Instruments enacted by the Canadian securities regulator; the theory of securities regulation; as well as enforcement and compliance.
650
Business Skills for Lawyers
The non-legal skills required by lawyers working in-house or with business clients. Topics may include reading and analyzing financial statements; understanding cash flow models; business valuation; negotiation; capital markets; crisis management; project management.
653
Directed Research
A supervised research project involving the in-depth examination of a legal problem or area of concern not normally covered in a substantive or procedural course and which provides the basis for an article, research paper, brief, memorial, draft legislation, etc. Admission to this course depends on the availability of supervising faculty.
656
Mergers and Acquisitions
Key legal and financial concepts for mergers and acquisitions. Topics may include structuring transactions, the required legal documentation, securities legislation, director and officer responsibilities, negotiations, financing, defensive tactics, due diligence, employment and other issues.
663
Dispute Resolution Clinical
Interest-based, consensus-building dispute resolution processes to enhance understanding of dispute resolution theory, which will be applied through placements drawing on the mentorship of lawyers and dispute resolution practitioners engaged in court-annexed or private mediation, facilitation, collaborative law, and other processes.
667
Advanced Public Law
Selected issues in constitutional law at the advanced level. Topics may include constitutional amendment, comparative approaches to rights, comparative federalism, the role of international law in constitutional interpretation, the legitimacy of judicial review, evidentiary issues in constitutional litigation, the role of social movements, and strategic litigation in securing constitutional rights.
673
Jessup Moot
Preparation for and participation in the Philip C. Jessup International Law Moot Court Competition.
674
Business Venture Clinic
A clinical seminar where students work with startup companies and entrepreneurs. Students may prepare memos and drafts of business agreements. Students receive feedback on their written work from practicing lawyers.
677
Canadian Corporate/Securities Law Moot
The development of appellate advocacy and other lawyering skills in the context of corporate and securities law in Canada.
678
The Gale Cup Moot
The development of appellate advocacy and other lawyering skills in the context of preparation for and participation in the national Gale Cup Moot.
683
Advanced Family Law
Selected topics in family law, including matrimonial property; division of pensions; international family law; and the law relating to children, including regulatory aspects (e.g. child welfare).
685
Business Clinical
The skills employed by a corporate solicitor in the context of one or more transactions. Skills covered may include drafting, negotiating, research, advocacy, and transaction management, in simulated or real transactions.
686
Clinical Theory
An opportunity to explore and reflect on what it means to be a good lawyer. Topics include the formation of professional identity and legal, ethical and practical issues in poverty law.
687
Criminal Justice Clinical
A clinical seminar in elements of criminal law covering topical, practical, and ethical issues in the practice of criminal law. Three short placements with Crown and defence lawyers and a provincial court judge.
688
Clinical Practice
Advanced experiential learning in a clinic setting. Students learn how to effectively manage clients and files while developing interviewing, counselling and advocacy skills in a variety of areas.
689
Family Law Clinical Seminar
A clinical seminar in elements of family law practice. The clinical experience may be obtained through simulated exercises, supervised handling of files and/or placements. Topics include Chambers advocacy, marital dispute consultations and drafting of a settlement.
690
Western Canada MacIntyre Cup Trial Competition
The development of trial advocacy and other lawyering skills in the context of preparation for and participation in the Western Canada Trial Competition. Credit for this competition does not preclude credit for the Sopinka Cup.
691
Natural Resources, Energy and Environmental Law Clinical
A clinical seminar involving placements in any one of the following practice areas: energy law, resources law, water law, and environmental law.
692
Selected Topics I
A variety of subject areas, either doctrinal or theoretical.
693
Selected Topics II
A variety of subject areas, either doctrinal or theoretical.
694
Selected Topics III
A variety of subject areas, either doctrinal or theoretical.
695
External Competitions
The development of advocacy and other lawyering skills in the context of preparation for and participation in an external competition not otherwise the subject of a course. A written component is generally required.
696
Clinical Studies
Participation in a clinical experience not otherwise the subject of a clinical course.
697
Corporate Tax
The provisions of the Income Tax Act applicable to corporations and their shareholders. Topics include the classification of corporations for tax purposes, the taxation of corporate income, the taxation of corporate distributions, and the taxation of various types of corporate reorganizations.
698
Immigration and Refugee Law
Basic principles, policies, and procedures governing immigration and refugee law. Topics include refugee law and status; selection and admission of immigrants; inadmissible and removable classes; exemptions and minister's permits; and appeals and judicial review in the federal court, including Charter issues.
699
Labour Law
The law governing unionized workplaces in Canada. Topics include freedom of association, the status of participants, union organization and certification, unfair labour practices, collective bargaining, the collective agreement and arbitration, industrial conflict, the duty of fair representation, and interaction between the labour law regime and the common-law of employment.
703
Graduate Seminar in Legal Research and Methodology
Preparation for developing, researching and writing a thesis or major research paper. The distinctive nature of legal scholarship and its professional context will be explored. Students will be introduced to specific research techniques and to the challenges of comparative and cross-cultural work.
705
Graduate Seminar in Legal Theory
An exploration of schools of legal theory, with the goal of helping students situate their graduate research within one or more of those approaches to legal scholarship. The seminar is structured around a series of readings describing different theoretical approaches and applying these approaches to areas of research.
706
Major Research Paper
Under the supervision of a member of the Faculty of Law or other suitable person appointed by the Graduate Co-ordinator, students will complete a major research paper, approximately 50 to 60 pages (15,000 – 18,000 words) in length. The paper must reflect extensive research on a topic in natural resources, energy or environmental law, and it must propose a solution to a problem or present a critical evaluation of an issue in this area of law. The paper will be evaluated on a Pass/Fail basis by the supervisor and one other person appointed by the Graduate Co-ordinator. In the event of disagreement between the supervisor and the other appointee, the Graduate Co-ordinator shall determine whether the paper is a pass or fail after reading the paper and then consulting with the supervisor and other appointee.
Law and Society
12
201
Introduction to Legal Studies
Overview of the role of law in society. Examination of different concepts of law. Study of legal rules, institutions, processes and personnel in social context. Discussion of construction and exercise of the power of law. Emphasis on Canadian law and legal system.
203
Introduction to Legal Knowledge
Examination of the philosophy and science of law as tools of social engineering. Students will be introduced to tort, contract, property and criminal law and will review different schools of thought and legal movements specific to these areas of law. Current legal developments (including decided Canadian cases) will be covered to illustrate how concepts such as risk, negligence, neighbour principle, contractual obligations, offer and acceptance, consideration, remedies and punishment play out in contemporary Canadian society.
313
Research Methods in Law and Society
Research and writing methods including legal research basics, legal analysis, qualitative strategies in socio-legal studies, academic writing, and academic methodology.
335
Equality Issues
An examination of the ability of the law to guarantee equality. Issues of gender, racial and class equality will be explored. Topics may include employment law, civil law, criminal law, reproductive rights and family law. All material is studied as it pertains to the Canadian legal culture.
337
Self-Regulation
Examines how individuals and groups create, maintain, and follow non-legal codes of conduct and, in turn, regulate themselves and society. Students will be introduced to concepts of self-governance and moral regulation found in  social manners, community standards, religious beliefs, as well as, consciously "legislated" group mechanisms such as professional codes of conduct, mission statements, and corporate governance practices.
401
Topics in Law and Society
An examination of selected topics in Law and Society.
413
Liberalism
An examination of the fundamental conceptions of rights and freedoms in the works of J.S. Mill and twentieth- and twenty-first-century philosophers. The treatment of these concepts in contemporary law and their role in contemporary legal and social issues are explored as well.
415
Socio-legal Issues in Contemporary Liberal Societies
An examination of the ways in which fundamental premises of legal liberalism, such as fairness, equality, and individual liberty, intersect with each other and with other key social values and premises. May include privacy, the nature of the rights attached to property, the different understandings of democracy operating in different countries, and the extent to which the state should support religion.
425
Law and Technology
Examines the relationship between law and legal institutions on the one hand, and science and technology on the other. Through close readings of texts and in-depth class discussion, students will investigate thematic issues such as the role of law in regulating science and technology; challenges to law raised by scientific discoveries and new technologies; and the influence of science and technology on law and legal institutions.
501
Directed Reading
Supervised individual study of a special topic.
590
Law and Society Honours Thesis and Seminar
Students will conduct an independent research project under the direction of a supervisor. In the seminar, students will discuss and present their projects and other topics relevant to conducting research.
591
Integrative Seminar
An advanced seminar integrating philosophical, theoretical, social, and legal approaches to understanding the relationship between law and society.
Linguistics
54
201
Introduction to Linguistics I

202
Introduction to Linguistics II
Scientific study of language, focusing on language in historical and social contexts. Topics include: writing systems, language change, language acquisition, language families and areas, sociolinguistics, psycholinguistics, and bilingualism.
221
Modern English Grammar
A comprehensive exploration of contemporary English, based on modern linguistic analysis, but also includes traditional grammatical terminology, as well as language change, attitudes to language varieties and problems in usage.
223
Language and Advertising
An investigation of the nature of persuasive messages from the perspective of linguistic theory. Topics may include truth and falsity, implication, ambiguity, and context-dependence.
225
Varieties of English
Survey and analysis of the varieties of English currently spoken in the world, including various dialects, especially Canadian and American, and English-based pidgins and creoles.
227
Rap Linguistics
The leading music genre known as rap is dominated by language. How this creatively flourishing art-form relates to language science. An examination of the manipulation of sounds, words, grammar, and meaning in rap, and what it reveals about language in the mind and in society.
301
Syntax I
Introduction to syntax. Emphasis on tree-drawing and basic argumentation skills. Topics may include: syntactic categories; grammatical, thematic, and structural relations; syntactic movement.
303
Phonology I
Theory and practice of phonological analysis: the classical phoneme; distinctive features and their organization; methods of analysis; underlying and surface representations; rules and derivations.
309
Language and Power
The nature of the linguistic resources used to create, enhance and justify positions of dominance or subordination, or to influence and persuade populations. Examples drawn from the discourse of gender and ethnic relations, government and business.
316
Language Acquisition I
Introduction to basic ideas and issues in first- and second-language acquisition. Adopts a linguistic approach, viewing language acquisition as the acquisition of a “mental grammar”, looking at examples from sound, sentence structure, word learning and meaning. Focus on defining the essential properties of an explanatory theory of language acquisition.
319
Introduction to Semantics
Introduction to the study of conventional meaning. Topics may include: word meaning, propositional and predicate logic, properties of quantifiers, definite and indefinite descriptions, and pragmatics.
337
Introduction to Speech-Language Pathology
A comprehensive overview of the subject including: basic components of speech and language, normal language development, communication disorders, and current professional issues.
341
Phonetics I
Intensive practice in the perception, production and transcription of speech sounds accompanied by an introduction to the physiology and acoustics of speech.
349
Language and Mind
An overview of central issues in the study of language and its relationship to the human mind. Topics may include the nature/nurture debate, human specialization for language, and theories of mental representation.
353
Historical Linguistics I
Central topics in the study of language change including: principles and methods of linguistic reconstruction; universals, typologies, and the explanation of language change; sources of language change with a consideration of acquisitional and sociolinguistic factors.
373
Introduction to Sociolinguistics
Social differentiation of language in terms of the gender, socio-economic status and geographical distribution of speakers.
377
Introduction to Pragmatics
An introduction to the study of context-dependent meaning. Topics may include: deixis, reference, implicature, presupposition, speech acts, and information structure.
381
The History of English
An introduction to important changes and stages in the history of English including its Indo-European and Germanic origins and a consideration of Modern English grammar and orthography from a historical perspective.
401
Syntax II
A theoretically grounded approach to syntax using data from a variety of languages. Constructing and evaluating syntactic hypotheses. May involve collecting data from a native speaker of a foreign language.
403
Phonology II
Recent issues in phonological theory.
407
Morphology I
An introduction to the study of word-structure, inflectional and word-formation morphology, morphological processes, morphological organization, interfaces with phonology and syntax. Practical problems in word analysis.
416
Language Acquisition II
In-depth investigation of issues in language acquisition. Topics include differentiating populations of learners (monolingual, bilingual and delayed first-language learners, child and adult second-language learners, heritage language learners) and the exploration of different kinds of research tasks and methods.
419
Advanced Semantics
Continuing study of conventional meaning accompanied by an introduction to some technical tools used in the field of semantics. Topics may include: compositionality, sets and functions, tense, aspect, modality, and event semantics.
441
Phonetics II
Continuing study of the anatomy, physiology, and acoustics of speech and related issues in speech research, paralleled by laboratory work in the acoustic and physiological analysis of speech.
451
History of Linguistic Thought
A survey of major schools of linguistic thought. Focus on the origin and development of concepts central to contemporary linguistic theory.
453
Historical Linguistics II
Theoretical approaches to current topics in the field of historical linguistics. Research methods and practical skills in data collection and analysis.
455
Typology
Study of the unity and diversity of the world's languages. How do the grammars of individual languages differ from each other, and in what ways are they all alike? Which characteristics are common across languages, and which are rare? An overview of the methodology and main results of typological research. Students work with data from unfamiliar languages.
467
Experimental Psycholinguistics
Exploration of the cognitive, neuropsychological, and social processes that underlie language abilities, with reference to linguistic theory. A laboratory component provides experience with methodologies used to study language behaviour.
505
Field Methods for Indigenous Languages
Principles and techniques of collecting, editing and analyzing elicited linguistic data and associated problems. Practical experience with language consultant(s).
507
Morphology II
A survey of issues in morphological theory.
511
Advanced Syntactic Analysis
A survey of current work in syntactic theory.
512
Advanced Phonological Analysis
An advanced course on current work in phonological theory.
516
Topics in Language Acquisition
Exploration of a selected topic related to current research in language acquisition. Topics may include current research on a specific population of learners, a particular research methodology, and the acquisition of a specific learning problem (e.g., phonotactics, intonation, binding, quantification).
519
Formal Semantics of Natural Language
Central issues in the logical semantics of natural language, focusing on topics such as quantification, scope, and the interpretation of pronouns.
531
Survey of Indigenous Languages of the Americas
A survey of the indigenous languages of the Americas, including classifications of language families and structural analysis of selected languages.
551
Linguistic Analysis
Linguistic analysis of a language or language family.
553
Topics in Historical Linguistics
An advanced course in the theory of historical linguistics.
560
Statistics for Linguistic Research
Introduction to basic statistical concepts, methods of analysis, and quantitative modelling techniques, with a focus on their application to the unique properties of language research and linguistic data.
571
Corpus and Experimental Methods for Syntax and Semantics
Introduction to programming methods for the development and searching of text corpora, as well as the design and implementation of studies using open source software. Study design will be introduced through critical reading of studies covering a range of syntactic and semantic phenomena.
598
Independent Research
Students carry out a specific research project under the supervision of a staff member and submit a thesis acceptable to the Linguistics Division of the School of Languages, Linguistics, Literatures and Cultures.
599
Conference Course
Directed research in areas of special interest to advanced students.
600
Introduction to Graduate Studies in Linguistics
This course provides an introduction to areas of research and theoretical orientations in which faculty in this department specialize, as well as to research and professional skills.
605
Field Methods

611
Advanced Syntactic Analysis
An advanced course in syntactic theory with focus on analytical and critical skills required for conducting syntactic research.
613
Advanced Phonological Analysis
An advanced course in phonological theory with focus on analytical and critical skills required for conducting phonological research.
631
Topics in Linguistic Theory

633
Topics in Language Acquisition

635
Analysis of a Language or Language Family
Seminar in the analysis of a selected language or language family
651
Topics in Historical Linguistics
Seminar in historical linguistics.
660
Quantitative Modelling of Linguistic Data
Introduction to basic statistical concepts, methods of analysis, and quantitative modelling techniques, with a focus on their application to the unique properties of language research and linguistics data.
671
Methods for Corpus and Experimental Studies in Syntax and Semantics
Introduction to programming methods for the development and searching of text corpora, as well as the design and implementation of studies using open source software. Study design will be introduced through critical reading of studies covering a range of syntactic and semantic phenomena. Programming skills to convert experiment software output into a format suitable for statistical analysis will also be covered.
697
Thesis Research Development

699
Conference and Reading Course

797
Senior Doctoral Seminar
A forum for discussing and presenting candidacy paper research, thesis research, and conference presentations/publications in preparation.
Management Studies
39
217
Introduction to Business Analytics

301
Research Methodologies
Introduction to how research is being done in the field of business, through critical exploration of research language, ethics and approaches.  Quantitative, qualitative and mixed methods approaches presented by faculty researchers. Students experiment with various research methods, identify problems, develop hypotheses and research questions, specify variables and choose from various research design tools such as experiments, survey, content analysis, focus groups and in-depth interviews.
359
Selected Topics in Management
Examination of selected topics in management.
391
Business Analytics
Business Analytics uses data, information technology, statistical analysis, and quantitative methods to build models that help managers gain improved insight about their business processes and make better, fact-based decisions. Analysis of complex business problems and application of higher-level modelling techniques including optimization, simulation, decision analysis, queuing theory and forecasting.
451
Corporate Governance and Ethical Decision-Making
Develop an increased awareness of the importance of corporate governance systems and strong financial decision making systems in developing effective business enterprises. Specific emphasis on the resolution of agency problems, the role of the board of directors, compensation systems and financial modelling.
453
Ethical Leadership
Apply a variety of different leadership frameworks to problems and develop an understanding of when various frameworks are most applicable. Critical thinking skills will be honed using film, short cases, readings, class discussions, and written opinion. Identify components of leadership behaviours and explore the complex interaction between leaders and members in the context of different ethical quandaries. Witness, experience, and "consume" leadership as it progresses from individual to team to organizational to community levels.
501
Capstone Applied Research Project I
Preparation for conducting an applied research project. Focus is on practical research issues such as choosing appropriate applied research topics, designing a research question, and applying the appropriate research methods. Development of the applied research project through identification of a potential client or organization and a field expert to work with.
503
Capstone Applied Research Project II
Continuation of work on the applied research project. Knowledge production and dissemination of insights from research. Analysis of data and communication of results to business and university stakeholders. Preliminary development of insights using collected data, critical evaluation of the project limitations and contribution, and delivery of results in an Honours undergraduate thesis.
511
Leadership Skills: Student Business Start-up
Provides general management skills through hands-on facilitation of a new business start-up. Teaching business basics to elementary school students and guiding them through the start-up, running and shut-down phases of a fundraising business.
559
Selected Topics in Management
Examination of selected topics in management.
571
Management of International Trade
Concepts and skills required to conduct international transactions in goods and services, including contracts, transportation, financing, insurance, customs clearance, compliance with import/export regulations and dispute resolution.
597
Directed Study in Management Studies
In-depth study in one of the functional areas of business.
611
Managerial Economics
Introduction to economic models for business decision making. Models from microeconomics are applied to provide insight in understanding costs, pricing, industry structure, and competitive interaction. Information economics is used to illustrate principal-agent problems that commonly arise in a business context. Macroeconomic models of supply and demand are applied to illustrate how government policy affects inflation and exchange rates.
613
Managerial Decision Modelling
The transformation of raw data into useful information for decision-making. Quantitative models are implemented with spreadsheets to develop skills in generating managerial insight from data and in dealing with uncertainty. Topics covered include basic probability and statistics, decision trees, regression analysis, optimization, and simulation.
672
Introduction to Business
Introduces the functional areas of business and their integration for the effective and efficient operation of organizations. Provides the foundation for the discipline based courses.
674
Integrated Decision Making
Integrative capstone course that challenges students to effectively respond to multi-functional problems.
676
Business Analytics
Analytical tools and techniques for managerial decision, and their application to decision scenarios that parallel common business decisions.
703
Philosophy of Science for Business Administration
Examines processes of development and discussion of theories, with a focus on business management research. Exploration of three main questions: (i) what is the role of theory in science; (ii) what makes good management theories; and (iii) how can theories in management or related disciplines be developed and tested. Classical philosophy of science, management research papers focused on scientific theory and explanation, and prescriptive studies with strategies or methods for theory development in management and related disciplines, are reviewed.
705
Critical Research Assessment
Development of skills associated with the evaluation and use of extant research. Emphasis is on the critical reading of methods and results sections of experimental and non-experimental research papers. Discussions regarding the appropriateness and limitations of the methodologies utilized, and statistical treatment of the data, will facilitate an understanding of research contributions. Studies using experimental and non-experimental design are included.
709
Qualitative Research Methods
Development of skills to conduct qualitative research in the context of business. Focus on research design and the processes of collecting and analyzing qualitative data as well as drawing conclusions and reporting research findings. Specific emphasis is given to case study research, ethnographic, and focus group research. Grounded theory, action research, narrative, and discursive research is also introduced.
711
Quantitative Design and Analysis
Development of skills associated with the design and implementation of experimental and non-experimental research. Specific emphasis on questionnaire design and psychometric properties, multiple regression, logistic regression, discriminant function analysis, factor analysis and structural equation modelling. Focus is on building capacity to conduct quantitative research.
713
Seminars in Advanced Business Management
Introduces to advanced topics in business management research. Consisting of a series of 3-hour lectures on different topics, given by different senior faculty members, students will gain insights into the broad perspectives of issues being studied. Course material will be based on the instructors' selection of top research in the fields of human resources, organizational dynamics, global strategy, international business, entrepreneurship, operations management, marketing, finance and governance.
715
Strategic Business Analysis
Introduction to strategic analysis. Integration of learning from various management disciplines through a "field experience" study of a business firm.
741
Business Process Improvement and Creative Problem Solving
Business process improvement and creative problem solving as critical components of competitiveness. The adjective "business" is used to indicate that the course emphasizes improvements in non-manufacturing processes (of relevance to all organizations) in such areas as development, distribution, financial accounting/planning, order entry, personnel, and purchasing. Topics covered include the relationship to Total Quality Management and Time-Based Competition, incremental versus radical improvement, selection of key processes for study (including bench-marking and the role of capacity constraints), process flow diagramming, Pareto analysis, cause-and-effect analysis, statistical control charts, affinity diagrams, and steps in creative problem solving. Team exercises and projects make up a substantial portion of the course.
743
International Logistics
The topic of logistics is concerned with managing the activities along a supply chain, from procuring materials to delivering goods that satisfy customers. In today's global economy, both suppliers and customers can be dispersed around the world. In this course students learn the processes required to manage the flow of materials and products from suppliers to customers in order to achieve a competitive advantage. They will study theoretical concepts and evaluate through practical cases how physical distribution, procurement and production can become effective key business supporters.
745
Knowledge Dissemination to Enhance Managerial Practice
Focuses on how to properly place and convey knowledge through appropriate outlets so that it is utilized and valued by the management community. Results in the dissemination of one or two research papers (qualitative or quantitative) through different media.
747
Business Economics in the Global Context
Examines long-term economic trends; trends that are guided by considerations such as the changing demographics of developing countries, rising nationalism, religion-based conflicts, climate change, and growing tensions between old and aspiring superpowers; and the implications of these trends for the world economy and the multi-national enterprises that operate in it.
751
Global Energy Finance and Accounting
Problems related to evaluating and financing energy enterprises. Financial and accounting principles applied to valuing and financing energy projects. Financial reporting, managerial control systems, theory of financing, valuation, and deal structuring. Focus on private sector energy enterprises.
770
Topics in Leadership
Students near graduation must prepare for the transition from individual contributor to team and organization leader. This course is a comprehensive assessment of leadership from the dimensions of creating a leadership mindset and managing relationships (subordinates, peers, superiors and stakeholders). The topics may be addressed through theory development, simulation, case and experiential methods to provide to a full awareness and appreciation of the corporate responsibility, ethical dilemmas, and societal impacts of decision-making within business, not-for-profit, and institutional leadership environments.
773
Multivariate Analysis in Management
Multivariate Analysis in Management is concerned with the study of association among sets of measurements. This multivariate statistics course is intended primarily for PhD students in Management although MBA (Thesis) students pursuing an empirical-based thesis can also benefit. The objective of this course is to introduce graduate students to a variety of multivariate statistical techniques and methods to enable them to effectively carry out an empirical research study in management including the business, public, and not-for-profit sectors. Topics include: introduction to research design and multivariate methods, linear regression, logistic regression, analysis of variance and covariance, multivariate analysis of variance, discriminant analysis, principal components analysis, common factor analysis, and additional multivariate topics if time permits. The technical level of treatment would require basic understanding of matrix and linear algebra and at least one first level course in statistics. Such preliminary technical understanding will be helpful to appreciate the theory and intuition behind the multivariate techniques. A good blend of technical, conceptual, and practical aspects (using SPSS software) of the course will be maintained.
781
Philosophy of Science in Management Studies
Historical and critical perspectives of classical issues in philosophy of science, nature of scientific explanation, confirmation of scientific theories, theories of truth, distinctions between science and non-science.
783
Advanced Research Methodology and Methods
Research methodology relevant to examination and testing of theoretical and applied issues in management. The development and testing of research concepts; research operations, designs and analysis.
789
Seminar in Management Studies
Intensive study and discussion of current literature and research with respect to selected topics in Management Studies.
791
Management Education Seminar
Curricular and course design, instructional techniques, instructional tools, teaching styles, career planning and professional ethics. Nature, role and function of universities, and business schools, business school relations.
793
Conceptual Frameworks of the Enterprise
Advanced, comparative institutional analysis to explain the choice of the firm's boundaries, the governance mechanisms to manage the interface with the external environment and the internal organizational design, so as to reduce transaction costs and facilitate value creation.
794
Theory Development
Processes of building, testing, and disseminating business management theories. Focus on the elements that constitute a theory, requirements for theory validation, and the role of theory in business management research. Analysis of mainstream theories in business management research. Readings include philosophy of science and management research materials on theory development and dissemination.
795
Research Development
Development of research skills through participation in a well-defined project under the direct supervision of an experienced researcher.
797
Directed Graduate Study in Management
Coverage of various topics on the basis of student and faculty interest.
799
Topics in Management Studies
Coverage of various topics on the basis of student and faculty interests.
Manufacturing Engineering
17
417
Manufacturing and Production Processes
The role and characterization of manufacturing technology within the manufacturing enterprise. Overview of deformation processes, joining processes, consolidation processes, material-removal processes, and material alteration processes. Process selection and planning.
501
Modelling and Simulation of Manufacturing Systems
General modelling of production systems. Spreadsheet modelling for capacity analysis. Fundamentals of discrete-event simulation including: key concepts; simulation world views; the simulation study life cycle. Modelling and programming aspects of discrete-event simulation including: verification and validation; simulation animation; interfacing simulation software with other systems. Statistical aspects of discrete-event simulation including: random number and random variate generation; input process modelling; output analysis; variance reduction techniques. Applications of discrete-event simulation to the design and analysis of manufacturing systems.
503
Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing
Hardware and software for computer-aided design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM) systems. Geometric modelling, transformation and visualization. Modelling of freeform curves and surfaces. Programming for computer numerically controlled (CNC) machining. Integration of CAD/CAM systems, Applications in motion analysis, structure analysis, optimization, rapid prototyping, reverse engineering and virtual engineering.
509
Advanced Manufacturing Systems
Manufacturing strategy and competitive manufacturing. Queuing theory and its application to manufacturing systems analysis (including rapid modelling tools). Linear programming and its application to manufacturing systems problems. Scheduling problems in manufacturing. Supply chain modelling and integration. Enterprise resource planning systems.
514
Integrated Manufacturing Systems
Fundamentals of integrated and competitive manufacturing. Manufacturing and operations strategy. Topics in production and operations management including: production planning and control systems; inventory management systems; process analysis and improvement; quality management systems.
517
Experimental Design and Analysis
Introduction to statistical Design of Experiments (DOE) techniques for efficient data collection, analysis and interpretation. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), including blocking and nesting, in full and fractional factorial designs to understand sources of variation in performance. Robust design, including classical response surface and Taguchi techniques, to minimize effects of environmental factors on performance variability. Applications to product and process improvement.
527
Project Engineering
The project lifecycle. Project planning, scheduling, and control. Resource considerations. Cost estimating, planning, and performance. Project risk. Project personnel and organizational structures.
529
Introduction to Microelectromechanical Systems
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and devices including microsensors and microactuators. Principles of operation, material properties, fabrication techniques including surface and bulk micro­machining, IC-derived microfabrication techniques, sensing and actuation principles, sensor dynamics issues, circuit and system issues, packaging, calibration and testing. Illustrative examples include (1) micromachined inertial sensors and actuators for manufacturing processes, (2) microactuator arrays for "smart surfaces," (3) biosensors for medical applications, and (4) transducers for aerospace applications.
533
Computer-Based Control for Industrial Automation
Concepts of digital control. Digital circuits. Logic Controller architecture, programming using digital logic concepts, and interfacing. I/O devices sensors and actuators. Applications to work cells and production lines.
605
Planning and Control of Computer Integrated Manufacturing
Advanced techniques for the design, planning, and control of integrated manufacturing systems. Course elements include: a framework for manufacturing planning and control; data flow and structured modelling methodologies; hierarchical models of manufacturing; cellular manufacturing organization; databases and communications; forecasting, demand management, capacity planning and master production scheduling; materials requirements planning, manufacturing resource planning, Just-in-Time manufacture, and Optimized Production Technology; control of independent demand inventory items; production activity control, shop floor control, scheduling, order release and dispatching; simulation in planning and control.
607
Total Quality Management
Statistical Process Control (SPC) for discrete and continuous manufacturing processes. Acceptance Sampling. Process capability analysis. Introduction to design of experiments (DOE). Overview of quality economics, quality standards and management philosophy.
609
Design and Analysis of Experiments
Statistical Design of Experiments (DOE) techniques for efficient data collection, analysis and interpretation. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), including blocking and nesting, in full and fractional factorial designs. Robust design, including classical response surface and Taguchi techniques. Applications to product and process improvement.
618
Manufacturing Optimization
Application of operations research techniques in manufacturing engineering: linear manufacturing optimization problems; transportation, assignment and transshipment problems; dynamic manufacturing programming problems; network problems; manufacturing decision problems.
619
Special Problems in Manufacturing Engineering
Designed to provide graduate students, especially at the PhD level, with the opportunity of pursuing advanced studies in particular areas under the direction of a faculty member. Students would be required to consider problems of an advanced nature.
621
Optimization Methods with Robotics Applications
Designed for graduate and senior undergraduate students interested in advanced topics in robotics. Based on the students' research topics, contents may vary. These include: fundamental theory in robotics, mathematical toolbox for optimization, differential kinematics, kinematics and actuation redundancy, optimal control, co-operating manipulators, redundancy in force sensing and sensor fusion.
623
CAD/CAM/CAE
Components of CAD/CAM/CAE systems. Geometric modelling. Development of customized CAD systems. Complex shape modelling. Computer-aided process planning. CNC machining. Rapid prototyping. Finite element analysis and motion analysis. Engineering optimization. Virtual design and manufacturing.
698
Graduate Project
Individual project in the student's area of specialization under the guidance of the student's supervisor. A written proposal, one or more written progress reports, and a final written report are required. An oral presentation is required upon completion of the course. Open only to students in the MEng (courses only) program.
Marine Science
19
321
Introduction to Marine Science
Exploring the ocean environment, marine organisms, marine ecosystems and the impact of humans on the sea.
420
Marine Phycology
A survey of the marine algae, with emphasis on the benthic forms in the vicinity of the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre. Lectures, laboratory work, field collecting, identification and observation. The study of living specimens is emphasized both in the laboratory and in the field.
430
Marine Ecology
An analytical approach to biotic associations in the marine environment. Opportunities will be provided for study of the intertidal realm in exposed and protected areas and of beaches and estuaries in the vicinity of the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre; plankton studies and investigations of the subtidal and benthic environments by diving and dredging are envisaged.
450
Introduction to Biological Oceanography
The biology of the oceans; supporting coverage of relevant physics and chemistry; plankton biology, community structure and life histories and influencing environmental factors. Collections will be made from sheltered inlets through Barkley Sound to offshore waters; field and laboratory studies of plankton organisms.
500
Directed Studies
Directed studies under the supervision of a member of the faculty. Involves a research project approved by the supervisor in the field of interest of the student, and will be designed to take maximum advantage of the laboratory and/or field opportunities offered by the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre.
501
Special Topics in Marine Biology
This course will be offered, as opportunities arise, by distinguished scientists visiting at the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre who are prepared to offer a course extending over a 3 week period.
502
Special Topics in Marine Biology
This course will be offered, as opportunities arise, by distinguished scientists visiting at the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre who are prepared to offer a course extending over a 6-week period.
507
Directed Studies
Directed studies under the supervision of a member of the faculty. Involves a research project approved by the supervisor in the field of interest of the student, and will be designed to take maximum advantage of the laboratory and/or field opportunities offered by the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre.
511
Papers and Seminar in Marine Science
The purpose of this course is to provide a forum for students to integrate the knowledge they are obtaining from the other courses in this program. It will be a combination of presentations by resident and visiting researchers followed by discussion, discussion of original papers selected by the instructor(s), and short critiques of original papers by each student.
513
Applied Data Analysis in Marine Science
Principles of study design and data analysis illustrated by lecture material, current research and research seminars. Students will acquire experience using the statistical computing language R.
515
Structure and Function in Marine Animals
This course will use marine invertebrates and vertebrates to explore the structural plans of animals in a functional framework. Rather than providing a comprehensive survey of diversity in the animal kingdom, specific taxa will be chosen that exemplify specific systems (e.g., respiratory, skeletal, nervous, etc.). The major taxa will be discussed together with minor groups that have peculiarities that are of general biological importance. This course will combine the disciplines of classification, evolution, morphology, biomechanics, physiology and biochemistry. The emphasis placed on each discipline will depend on the interests of the instructor. Field work will be integrated with the laboratory exercises.
525
Ecological Adaptations of Seaweeds
An exploration of morphological, physiological, genetic and reproductive adaptations of seaweeds to their natural and man-altered environments. Daily lectures and laboratory exercises will complement frequent field observations.
537
Population and Community Ecology of Marine Organisms
An introduction to the concepts of marine plant, animal and community ecology. Emphasis will be on organism/physical and chemical environmental interactions, organismal interactions, and concepts of biological diversity. Daily lectures and laboratory exercises will be complemented by frequent field excursions.
540
Biology of Marine Birds
A study of the interrelationship of birds and the marine environment. Lectures will emphasize the systematics and ecological relationships, behaviour, life histories, movements and conservation of marine birds. Census techniques and methods of study of marine birds in the field will be considered. Seabird identification, classification, morphology, plumage and moult will be examined in the laboratory.
572
Marine Invertebrate Zoology
A survey of the marine phyla emphasizing natural history, morphology and systematics of the local invertebrate fauna. The course will include lectures, laboratory work, field collection, identification and observation. The study of living specimens is emphasized both in the laboratory and in the field.
574
Biology of Fishes
Classification, physiology, ecology, behaviour and zoogeography of fishes with particular emphasis on those in the marine environment of the British Columbia coast. Involves some field projects.
600
Directed Studies
A course of directed studies under the supervision of a member of faculty, involving a research project approved by the supervisor. Each study will be designed to take maximum advantage of laboratory and/or field opportunities offered by the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre.
601
Special Topics (3 weeks)
Courses of a specialized nature offered, as opportunities arise, by distinguished scientists visiting the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre.
602
Special Topics (6 weeks)
Courses of a specialized nature offered, as opportunities arise, by distinguished scientists visiting the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre.
Marketing
28
317
Foundations of Marketing
An introductory marketing course designed for management students to introduce the principles and practices of marketing. Topics will cover basic marketing concepts, societal issues, and the decision-making process of marketers in developing marketing strategies and plans. The focus of the course will be on the implementation of specific product, pricing, distribution and communication strategies for specific market situations.
341
Introduction to Marketing
An introductory marketing course designed for non-Management students to introduce the broad principles and practices of marketing from both an organizational and societal perspective. Topics will cover basic marketing concepts, societal issues, and the decision process of marketers in developing, pricing, promoting and distributing their products.
431
Retail Management
A strategic approach to the retail industry. Managing the retail operation, including site selection, store design, consumer behaviour in retail situations, buying, inventory management, and visual merchandising. The role of retailing in the global economy.
433
Business-To-Business Marketing
Marketing management and theory applied to the purchase of products and services by organizations. Topics include industrial market dynamics, organizational buying behaviour, relationship development, technology, and the importance of innovation.
435
Marketing Communications
Evaluations of the roles of various communication tools including advertising, sales promotion, personal selling and public relations.
449
Sales Management
Strategic and managerial aspects of professional selling and sales force management. Topics include sales forecasting, recruitment, training, motivation, compensation and territory management, CRM, integration of technology, sales professionalism/ethics.
465
Marketing Research
Understanding how to conduct and evaluate research for management decision making. Emphasis on research design, measurement concepts, sample design, field work, statistical concepts, data analysis and reporting research findings. Practical application by doing a field research study.
467
International Marketing
A course on the environment and basic principles underlying the design and implementation of marketing strategies across national and cross-cultural boundaries. Topics will follow the decision process of international marketers in researching the environment, planning the entry strategy and designing their activities on product, distribution, promotion and pricing.
475
Digital Marketing
Examination of specific digital strategies, tactics and platforms to understand the concepts of digital and interactive marketing. Topics include social media, user-generated content, mobile marketing and display advertising.
477
Product Management
An in-depth examination of product management issues facing organizations. This includes strategic innovation, product portfolio, new product/service development, brand management, and diffusion of technology.
483
Buyer Behaviour
Study of factors influencing buyer decision making and purchase behaviour. Topics include buyer motivation, personality, learning, and attitudes as well as the influence of culture, social class, groups, and situational contexts on buyers.
487
Services Marketing
Application of the managerial practices and theory related to services marketing. Topics include management and measurement of service quality, service recovery. The linking of customer measurement to performance measurement, and cross-function issues through integration of marketing with disciplines such as operations and human resources.
493
Strategic Marketing
Marketing strategy is explored in the context of overall corporate strategy. Integrates the aspects of the market mix into formal planning systems. The focus of the course is on strategic responses to changing customer needs and competitive activities.
559
Selected Topics in Marketing
Investigation of selected topics in Marketing.
601
Marketing Management
An introductory course on marketing management with an emphasis on the marketing concept as the focus of business strategy. The decision variables as well as functional frameworks used by marketing managers are emphasized by concentrating on the relationship between business and consumers.
672
Strategic Marketing
Introduction to traditional marketing concepts such as segmentation, positioning, product development, and pricing. It also includes omnichannel marketing, permission and inbound marketing, personalization and customer relationship management, and content marketing.
674
Consumer Insights
Provides practical insights into all aspects of the marketing mix. Emphasizes measurement, testing, and interpretation of consumer responses in areas such as perception, motivation, decision making, and consumer culture.
735
Marketing Communications
Evaluation of strategic roles of a variety of communication disciplines - such as advertising, direct response advertising, sales promotion and public relations - and how companies combine those disciplines to provide clarity, consistency, and maximum impact.
741
Business-To-Business Marketing
Management issues in the marketing of products and services to business, government and industrial customers. Topics include organizational buying behaviour, industrial market segmentation, demand analysis and sales forecasting, development and implementation of an industrial marketing mix.
761
Buyer Behaviour
Study of factors influencing buyer decision-making processes and purchase behaviours, with implications for marketing practice.
763
Marketing Research
Study of research as a process for gathering market information to aid problem solving. Steps in the research process reviewed include problem definition, research design, data collection, data analysis and report preparation.
783
Services Marketing and Management
Study of processes and practices relevant to strategic firms using service for competitive advantage. Focuses on the integration of marketing, operations, and human resources from the consumer's perspective.
785
New Venture Marketing
Within the context of high-potential, high growth ventures, examines four pillars of new product/new business opportunity.  How to create value for the customer, solve significant problems through product and service design, measure sustainable financial value, and assess fit of new ideas with entrepreneur/organization.  Emphasis on discovering market opportunities and exploring product or service feasibility.
789
Seminar in Marketing Management
Intensive study and discussion of current literature and research with respect to selected, advanced topics in marketing.
793
Strategic Marketing
Strategic market planning in a corporate context. Developing marketing strategies and understanding implementation. Examining the market management process.
795
International Marketing
Design and implementation of marketing strategies across countries. Focuses on the global marketing environment and decision issues on foreign market entry, local marketing and global management of marketing activities.
797
Advanced Seminar in Marketing

799
Doctoral Seminars in Marketing

Mathematics
84
177
Further Topics from Mathematics 277
An overview of the basic notions in multivariate calculus: vector functions and differentiation, curves and parametrization, functions of several variables, partial differentiation, differentiability, implicit functions, extreme values.
205
Mathematical Explorations
A mathematics appreciation course. Topics selected by the instructor to provide a contemporary mathematical perspective and experiences in mathematical thinking. May include historical material on the development of classical mathematical ideas as well as the evolution of recent mathematics.
209
Applied and Computational Linear Algebra for Energy Engineers
An introduction to systems of linear equations, vectors in Euclidean space and matrix algebra. Geometrical applications and computing techniques will be emphasized. Students will complete a project using mathematical software.
211
Linear Methods I
An introduction to systems of linear equations, vectors in Euclidean space and matrix algebra. Additional topics include linear transformations, determinants, complex numbers, eigenvalues, and applications.
213
Linear Algebra I
A rigorous introduction to the theory of vector spaces, with an emphasis on proof writing and abstract reasoning. Topics include fields, subspaces, bases and dimension, linear transformations, determinants, eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
249
Introductory Calculus
An introduction to single variable calculus. Limits, derivatives and integrals of algebraic, exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric functions play a central role. Additional topics include applications of differentiation; the fundamental theorem of calculus, improper integrals and applications of integration.
265
University Calculus I
An introduction to single variable calculus intended for students with credit in high school calculus. Limits, derivatives, and integrals of algebraic, exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric functions play a central role. Additional topics include applications of differentiation; the fundamental theorem of calculus, improper integrals and applications of integration. Differential calculus in several variables will also be introduced.
267
University Calculus II
A concluding treatment of single variable calculus and an introduction to calculus in several variables. Single variable calculus: techniques of integration, sequences, series, convergence tests, and Taylor series. Calculus of several variables: partial differentiation, multiple integration, parametric equations, and applications
271
Discrete Mathematics
An introduction to proof techniques and abstract mathematical reasoning: sets and relations, induction, counting, prime numbers, divisibility and modular arithemetic, graphs and trees.
273
Numbers and Proofs
A rigorous introduction to proof techniques and abstract mathematical reasoning with an emphasis on number systems. Topics include functions, sets and relations; the integers, prime numbers, divisibility and modular arithmetic; induction and recursion; real numbers; Cauchy sequences and completeness; complex numbers.
275
Calculus for Engineers and Scientists
An extensive treatment of differential and integral calculus in a single variable, with an emphasis on applications. Differentiation: derivative laws, the mean value theorem, optimization, curve sketching and other applications. Integral calculus: the fundamental theorem of calculus, techniques of integration, improper integrals, and areas of planar regions. Infinite series: power series, Taylor’s theorem and Taylor series.
277
Multivariable Calculus for Engineers and Scientists
An introduction to calculus of several real variables: curves and parametrizations, partial differentiation, the chain rule, implicit functions; integration in two and three variables and applications; optimization and Lagrange multipliers.
305
Inside Mathematics
An exploration of the usually tacit elements of mathematical concepts and processes, the course focuses on strategies for unpacking concepts and for sustained engagement in inquiry.
307
Complex Analysis I
An initial treatment of complex analytic functions in a single variable. Topics include differentiation, Cauchy-Riemann equations, line integration, Cauchy’s theorem and Cauchy’s integral formula, Taylor’s theorem, the residue theorem, and applications to definite integrals.
311
Linear Methods II
An introductory course in the theory of abstract vector spaces: linear independence, spanning sets, basis and dimension; linear transformations and the rank-nullity theorem; the Gram-Schmidt algorithm and orthogonal diagonalization; singular value decomposition and other applications.
313
Linear Algebra II
The theory of linear operators acting on finite dimensional vector spaces: invariant subspaces, diagonalization and triangulation; canonical forms; inner product spaces and orthogonalization; spectral theory; singular value decomposition and other applications.
315
Algebra I
A broad overview of the elementary theory of groups, rings and fields. Group theory: cyclic, symmetric, alternating, dihedral and classical matrix groups, cosets and Lagrange’s theorem, group homomorphisms, normal subgroups, quotient groups and the isomorphism theorem. Rings and fields: the integers modulo n, polynomial rings, ring homomorphisms, ideals, quotient rings the isomorphism theorem, unique factorization domains, principal ideal domains, Euclidean domains and the construction of finite fields.
318
Introduction to Cryptography
The basics of cryptography, with emphasis on attaining well-defined and practical notions of security. Symmetric and public-key cryptosystems; one-way and trapdoor functions; mechanisms for data integrity; digital signatures; key management; applications to the design of cryptographic systems. Assessment will primarily focus on mathematical theory and proof-oriented homework problems; additional application programming exercises will be available for extra credit.
319
Transformation Geometry
Geometric transformations in the Euclidean plane: Symmetry, Frieze, and Wallpaper groups.
322
Differential Geometry
The fundamentals of differential geometry primarily with a focus on the theory of curves and surfaces in three dimensional space. The theory of curves studies global properties of curves such as the four vertex theorem. The theory of surfaces introduces the fundamental quadratic forms of a surface, intrinsic and extrinsic geometry of surfaces, and the Gauss-Bonnet theorem.
325
Introduction to Optimization
An example driven overview of optimization problems: quadratic forms, minimum energy and distance, least squares, generalized inverses, location and classification of critical points, variational treatment of eigenvalues, Lagrange multipliers and linear programming.
327
Number Theory
Divisibility and the Euclidean algorithm, modular arithmetic and congruences, quadratic reciprocity, arithmetic functions, distribution of primes.
331
Advanced Calculus for the Natural Sciences
A broad treatment of differential and integral calculus with an emphasis on techniques used in the natural sciences. Differential equations: linear ordinary differential equations, and systems of ordinary differential equations. Calculus of several variables: partial differentiation, the chain rule, double and triple integrals. Introduction to vector analysis: theorems of Green, Gauss and Stokes. Additional topics: notions of probability and normal distribution; the Fourier transform.
335
Analysis I
A rigorous treatment of the theory of functions of a single real variable: functions, countable and uncountable sets; the axioms and basic topology of the real numbers; convergence of sequences; limits of functions, continuity and uniform continuity; differentiability and the mean value theorem; the Riemann integral and the fundamental theorem of calculus; series and convergence tests.
355
Enriched Analysis I

361
Linear Spaces with Applications
Canonical forms. Inner product spaces, invariant subspaces and spectral theory. Quadratic forms.
367
University Calculus III
An overview of differential calculus in several variables and vector calculus. Functions of several variables; limits, continuity, differentiability, partial differentiation, applications including optimization and Lagrange multipliers. Vector calculus: vector functions, line integrals and surface integrals, Green’s theorem, Stokes’ theorem, and the Divergence theorem.
371
Combinatorics and Graph Theory
Counting techniques, generating functions, inclusion-exclusion, introduction to graph theory.
375
Differential Equations for Engineers and Scientists
Definition, existence and uniqueness of solutions; first order and higher order equations and applications; Homogeneous systems; Laplace transform; partial differential equations of mathematical physics.
376
Differential Equations I
Classification of ordinary differential equations, first and second order equations with applications, series solutions about regular points and singular points, special functions, Laplace transform.
377
Vector Calculus for Engineers and Scientists
Review of calculus of functions of several variables. Vector fields, line integrals, independence of path, Green’s theorem; Surface integrals, divergence theorem, Stokes’ theorem; applications; curvilinear co-ordinates; Laplace, diffusion and wave equations in three dimensional space.
383
Introduction to Mathematical Finance
An introduction to the fundamental concepts of mathematical finance in an elementary setting. Topics include: risk, return, no arbitrage principle; basic financial derivatives: options, forwards and future contracts; risk free assets, time value of money, zero coupon bonds; risky assets, binomial tree model, fundamental theorem of asset pricing; portfolio management and capital asset pricing model; no arbitrage pricing of financial derivatives; hedging.
391
Numerical Analysis I
Interpolation and approximation, numerical integration and differentiation, numerical methods for the solution of non-linear equations, systems of linear equations and the eigenvalue problem, introduction to a scientific computing software.
401
Special Topics
Higher level topics which can be repeated for credit.
403
Topics in Mathematics for Economics
Techniques of integration. Multiple integrals. Analysis of functions. Continuity. Compact sets. Convex sets. Separating hyperplanes. Lower and upper hemi-continuous correspondences. Fixed point theorems, Optimal control.
413
Introduction to Partial Differential Equations
First order partial differential equations, Sturm-Liouville systems, Fourier series, Double Fourier series, Fourier integrals, Applications to boundary value problems in bounded and unbounded domains, Bessel function with applications.
415
Mathematical Methods
Mathematical analysis of linear systems. Fourier and Laplace transforms, applications and numerical methods. Functions of a complex variable and applications.
429
Cryptography: Design and Analysis of Cryptosystems
Review of basic algorithms and complexity. Designing and attacking public key cryptosystems based on number theory. Basic techniques for primality testing, factoring and extracting discrete logarithms. Elliptic curve cryptography. Additional topics may include knapsack systems, zero knowledge, attacks on hash functions, identity-based cryptography, and quantum cryptography.
431
Algebra II
An intermediate course in the theory of groups and fields. Group theory: group actions, Sylow theorems, solvable, nilpotent and p-groups, simplicity of alternating groups and PSL(n,q). Field theory: algebraic and transcendental extensions, separability and normality, Galois theory, insolvability of the general quintic equation, and computation of Galois groups over the rationals.
433
Mathematical Methods in Physics
Fourier analysis. Laplace Transforms. Partial differential equations. Complex analysis. Residue integrals. Extensive physical applications.
445
Analysis II
An intermediate course in the theory of metric spaces and the continuous functions that act on them: metric spaces and normed vector spaces; complete metric spaces and the Baire category theorem; continuous functions on compact metric spaces and uniform convergence; the contraction mapping principle and applications; theorems of Stone-Weierstrass and Arzelà-Ascoli; differentiability on Euclidean spaces and the implicit function theorem.
447
Enriched Analysis II

476
Differential Equations II
Existence and uniqueness theorems, comparison and oscillation theorems, Green's functions, Sturm-Liouville problems, systems of equations, phase portraits, stability.
493
Numerical Analysis II
Numerical solution of ordinary differential equations, single and multi-step methods, numerical solution of boundary value problems, numerical solution of partial differential equations, stability analysis.
501
Measure and Integration
Abstract measure theory, basic integration theorems, Fubini's theorem, Radon-Nikodym theorem, Lp Spaces, Riesz representation theorems.
502
Topics in Mathematics
Topics will be chosen according to the interests of instructors and students.
503
The Mathematics of Wavelets, Signal and Image Processing
Continuous and discrete Fourier transforms, the Fast Fourier Transform, wavelet transforms, multiresolution analysis and orthogonal wavelet bases, and applications.
505
Calculus on Manifolds
Integral and differential calculus on manifolds including tensor fields, covariant differentiation, Lie differentiation, differential forms, Frobenius' theorem, Stokes' theorem, flows of vector fields.
511
Algebra III
A sophisticated introduction to modules over rings, especially commutative rings with identity. Major topics include: snake lemma; free modules; tensor product; hom-tensor duality; finitely presented modules; invariant factors; free resolutions; and the classification of finitely generated modules over principal ideal domains. Adjoint functors play a large role. The course includes applications to linear algebra, including rational forms.
515
Foundations
Set theory, mathematical logic, and category theory. Topics covered will vary based on interests of students and instructor.
516
Senior Project
A capstone course intended for Mathematics students in the final year of study (excluding those in the honours program or the statistics concentration). Students will investigate scientific or social issues by applying mathematical methods acquired in previous mathematics courses. A final project will be submitted at the end of the term and its contents summarized in a presentation.
518
Honours Thesis
A capstone course intended for Honours Mathematics students in their final year of study. Students will produce and present a substantial thesis under the supervision of a faculty member. The emphasis is on how to address theoretical or real world scientific or social issues by applying the various mathematical methods acquired in the earlier years in a unified and appropriate way.
521
Complex Analysis II
A rigorous study of function of a single complex variable. Holomorphic function, Cauchy integral formula and its applications. Conformal mappings. Fractional linear transformations. Argument principle. Schwarz lemma. Conformal self-maps of the unit disk.
525
Introduction to Algebraic Topology
An introduction to the algebraic invariants that distinguish topological spaces. Specifically, the course focuses on the fundamental group and its applications, and homology. Students will be introduced to the basics of homological algebra.
527
Computational Number Theory
An investigation of major problems in computational number theory, with emphasis on practical techniques and their computational complexity. Topics include basic integer arithmetic algorithms, finite fields, primality proving, factoring methods, algorithms in algebraic number fields.
545
Analysis III
Sequences and series of functions; Lebesgue integration on the line, Fourier series and the Fourier transform, pointwise convergence theorems, distributions and generalized functions.
581
Stochastic Calculus for Finance
Martingales in discrete and continuous time, risk-neutral valuations, discrete- and continuous-time (B,S)-security markets, Cox-Ross-Rubinstein formula, Wiener and Poisson processes, Ito formula, stochastic differential equations, Girsanov’s theorem, Black-Scholes and Merton formulas, stopping times and American options, stochastic interest rates and their derivatives, energy and commodity models and derivatives, value-at-risk and risk management.
583
Computational Finance
Review of financial asset price and option valuation models; model calibration; tree-based methods; finite-difference methods; Monte Carlo simulation; Fourier methods.
600
Research Seminar
A professional skills course, focusing on the development of technical proficiencies that are essential to succeed as practicing mathematicians in academia, government, or industry. The emphasis is on delivering professional presentations and using modern mathematical research tools. A high level of active student participation is required.
601
Measure and Integration
Abstract measure theory, basic integration theorems, Fubini's theorem, Radon-Nikodym theorem, Lp spaces, Riesz representation theorem.
603
Analysis III
Sequences and series of functions; Lebesgue integration on the line, Fourier series and the Fourier transform, pointwise convergence theorems, distributions and generalized functions.
605
Differential Equations III
Systems of ordinary differential equations.  Existence and uniqueness. Introduction to partial differential equations.
607
Algebra III
A sophisticated introduction to modules over rings, especially commutative rings with identity. Major topics include: snake lemma; free modules; tensor product; hom-tensor duality; finitely presented modules; invariant factors; free resolutions; and the classification of finitely generated modules over principal ideal domains. Adjoint functors play a large role. The course includes applications to linear algebra, including rational canonical form and Jordan canonical form.
617
Functional Analysis
Introduction to Hilbert and Banach spaces, linear operators, weak topologies, and the operator spectrum.
621
Complex Analysis
A rigorous study of function of a single complex variable. Holomorphic function, Cauchy integral formula and its applications. Conformal mappings. Fractional linear transformations. Argument principle. Schwarz lemma. Conformal self-maps of the unit disk.
625
Introduction to Algebraic Topology
Introduction to the algebraic invariants that distinguish topological spaces. Focuses on the fundamental group and its applications, and homology. Introduction to the basics of homological algebra.
627
Algebraic Geometry
The objective of this course is to provide an introduction to modern algebraic geometry sufficient to allow students to read research papers in their fields which use the language of schemes. Topics will include Spectra of rings; the Zariski topology; affine schemes; sheaves; ringed spaces; schemes; morphisms of finite type; arithmetic schemes; varieties; projective varieties; finite morphisms, unramified morphisms; etale morphisms.
631
Discrete Mathematics

635
Geometry of Numbers
The interplay of the group-theoretic notion of lattice and the geometric concept of convex set, the lattices representing periodicity, the convex sets geometry. Topics include convex bodies and lattice points, the critical determinant, the covering constant and the inhomogeneous determinant of a set, Star bodies, methods related to the above, and homogeneous and inhomogeneous forms.
637
Infinite Combinatorics
An excursion into the infinite world, from Ramsey Theory on the natural numbers, to applications in Number Theory and Banach Spaces, introduction to tools in Model Theory and Logic, fascinating homogeneous structures such as the rationals and the Rado graph, and possibly further explorations into the larger infinite world.
641
Number Theory

643
Computational Number Theory
An investigation of major problems in computational number theory, with emphasis on practical techniques and their computational complexity. Topics include basic integer arithmetic algorithms, finite fields, primality proving, factoring methods, algorithms in algebraic number fields.
647
Modular Forms

651
Topics in Applied Mathematics
Topics will be chosen according to the interest of the instructors and students.
653
Topics in Pure Mathematics
Topics will be chosen according to the interest of the instructors and students.
661
Scientific Modelling and Computation I

663
Applied Analysis

667
Introduction to Quantum Information

669
Scientific Modelling and Computation II

681
Stochastic Calculus for Finance
Martingales in discrete and continuous time, risk-neutral valuations, discrete- and continuous-time (B,S)-security markets, the Cox-Ross-Rubinstein formula, Wiener and Poisson processes, Itô’s formula, stochastic differential equations, Girsanov’s theorem, the Black-Scholes and Merton formulas, stopping times and American options, stochastic interest rates and their derivatives, energy and commodity models and derivatives, value-at-risk and risk management.
683
Computational Finance
Basic computational techniques required for expertise quantitative finance. Topics include basic econometric techniques (model calibration), tree-based methods, finite-difference methods, Fourier methods, Monte Carlo simulation and quasi-Monte Carlo methods.
685
Stochastic Processes
Stochastic processes are fundamental to the study of mathematical finance, but are also of vital importance in many other areas, from neuroscience to electrical engineering. Topics to be covered: Elements of stochastic processes, Markov chains and processes, Renewal processes, Martingales (discrete and continuous times), Brownian motion, Branching processes, Stationary processes, Diffusion processes, The Feynman-Kac formula, Kolmogorov backward/forward equations, Dynkin’s formula.
691
Advanced Mathematical Finance I

693
Advanced Mathematical Finance II

Mechanical Engineering
62
101
Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering Block Course
Special topics in Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering. Research and industry presentations, software training, informational sessions, and field trips as resources permit.
317
Mechanics of Deformable Solids I
Review of axial-force, shear-force, bending moment and torque diagrams. Review of vector and matrix algebra. Kinematics of deformation and strain. Concept of stress. Constitutive equations. The states of plane stress and plane strain. Solutions to elementary elasticity problems – axial force, torsion, bending, shear force. Deflection of beams. Euler buckling. Yield criteria.
337
Computing Tools for Engineering Design
Application of high-level software to the solution of design problems. Evaluation and validation of alternate solution approaches. Numeric and symbolic computation, visualization, data analysis, model-based analysis. Topics will be derived from real engineering problems.
339
Engineering Graphics and CAD
Technical sketching. Orthographic projections. Multiviews, auxiliary views and section views. Dimensions and tolerances. Working drawings. Design applications. Computer-Aided Design (CAD) software is used for 3D modelling and 2D drawing.
341
Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics
Basic principles of mechanics of fluids. Fluid statics: forces on surfaces, buoyancy, stability. Continuity, energy and momentum equations applied to control-volume analysis. Dimensional analysis and physical similarity. Introduction to external flows and flow through pipes. Applications to a variety of problems in mechanical engineering.
421
Materials I
Fundamentals of materials science with emphasis on the structure of materials and structure/property relationships: atomistic models; equilibrium phase diagrams; kinetics and non-equilibrium transformation diagrams; thermal-mechanical processing; microstructure formation and control; ductility mechanisms; material selection; and an introduction to fracture.
461
Foundations of Mechatronics
Modelling, analysis, and design of dynamic systems, including mechanical, electrical, electromechanical, fluidic, thermal, and mixed systems. Transient and forced response of linear time-invariant systems. Performance analysis and design to meet specifications in the time and frequency domains. Application of feedback control to dynamic systems. Laboratory: programming and interfacing a microcontroller with sensors and actuators.
471
Heat Transfer
Modes of heat transfer; conduction, convection, radiation. Conduction in plane walls and cylinders. Conduction-convection systems, fins. Principles of convection. Empirical and practical relations for forced convection heat transfer. Natural convection. Condensation and boiling heat transfer. Heat exchangers. The log-mean temperature difference method.
473
Fundamentals of Kinematics and Dynamics of Machines
Basic mechanisms and linkages in machinery. Kinematics and kinetics of mechanisms. Cam design and dynamic analysis. Ordinary and planetary gear trains.
479
Mechanics of Deformable Solids II
Review of stress and strain. Equilibrium and compatibility equations, and boundary conditions. Constitutive behaviour of materials. Solution to two-dimensional problems in elasticity. Failure criteria for ductile and brittle materials. Principle of virtual work and energy methods. The Rayleigh-Ritz and the finite element numerical methods in solid mechanics.
485
Mechanical Engineering Thermodynamics
Review of fundamentals; thermodynamic properties; flow and non-flow processes; Carnot cycle; Rankine cycle including reheat and regeneration. Engine gas cycles including simple gas turbines; gas turbines with reheat, intercooling and heat exchange. Reciprocating air compressors and expanders. Applications of humidity considerations; heat-pump and refrigeration cycles and their performance criteria. Combustion processes, chemical equilibrium, dissociation.
493
Machine Component Design
Introduction to the principles of machine component design. Design for stiffness, strength, and endurance. Surface contacts, wear, and lubrication. Tolerances and fits. Design and selection of mechanical elements such as shafts, bolted joints, welded joints, hydrodynamic bearings, ball and roller bearings, gears, belts, brakes, clutches, and springs.
495
Fluid Mechanics
Control volume methodology for multi-dimensional systems as applied to conservation principles (mass, linear and angular momentum); Navier-Stokes equations applied to pipe and boundary layer flows; basic principles of potential flow theory and aerodynamics and an introduction to compressible flow (convergent-divergent channels and normal shocks).
501
Mechanical Engineering Capstone Design Project I
A team-based project course with the focus on the design process associated with mechanical and manufacturing engineering. The design process consists of the stages of conceptual design, design development and verification. Project management, teamwork and communication are emphasized for professional development.
502
Mechanical Engineering Capstone Design Project II
A continuation of the capstone design project, where student teams build on their design work in Part I.
505
Robotics
Kinematics, statics, dynamics and control of robot arms. Robot actuators, drives, sensors, and vision. Applications of robots.
519
Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering
Advanced topics in Mechanical Engineering.
521
Materials II
Fundamentals and applications of materials science to engineering design: welding metallurgy; deformation and strength behaviour of real materials; failure analysis; fibre reinforced composites; fracture mechanics; fatigue; and creep.
547
Finite Element Method
Review of basic concepts in the Theory of Elasticity. Stress, strain, equilibrium. Stress-strain relations. The principle of virtual work and its use in deriving exact and approximate equilibrium equations. Example: beam theory. Matrix analysis of framed structures. The stiffness method. The finite element method and other discretization procedures. The 4-node plane stress rectangular element. Shape functions. Derivation of stiffness matrix by means of the principle of virtual work. Isoparametric elements, completeness. Numerical integration of scheme. Programming Considerations. Solution of problems with the aid of a computer. Additional topics: Dynamics, heat transfer, fluid dynamics.
560
Mechatronics Design Laboratory
A hands-on laboratory experience in the design and analysis of microprocessor-controlled electro-mechanical components. Emphasis will be on laboratory projects in which teams of students will configure, design, and implement mechatronic systems. Laboratories cover topics such as aliasing, quantization, electronic feedback, power amplifiers, digital logic, encoder interfacing, and motor control leading to prototyping and design of commercially viable products. Lectures will cover comparative surveys, operational principles, and integrated design issues associated with the spectrum of mechanism, electronics, and control components.
583
Mechanical Systems in Buildings
Fundamentals of heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems in buildings. Heating and cooling loads. Codes, regulations, and standards. System selection, generation equipment, heat exchangers, distribution and driving systems, terminal units, controls and accessories, and cost estimating. Energy efficiency and renewable energy applications. Elevators and escalators. Lifting devices. Sewage systems.
585
Control Systems
Modelling of physical systems; feedback control; stability; performance specification in the time and frequency domains; root locus plots; Bode and Nyquist plots; Proportional/Integral/Derivative (PID) control and dynamic compensation.
587
Continuum Mechanics
Kinematics of deformation, concept of stress, balance of mass, linear momentum, angular momentum and energy. Thermodynamics of continua. Constitutive equations for viscous fluids and nonlinear elastic solids.
595
Gas Dynamics
Fundamentals of one-dimensional gas dynamics. Isentropic and non-isentropic flows, applications of dynamical similarity to shock waves. Oblique shocks, supersonic nozzles, flows with friction or heat transfer. Introduction to computational fluid dynamics (CFD).
597
Turbomachinery
Performance of turbomachines, machine selection, Reynolds number and scale effects. Two dimensional flow in turbomachines, degree of reaction and vector diagrams; flow irreversibilities and loss coefficients; pump, compressor and turbine efficiencies. Design of pumps, fans, centrifugal compressors, axial-flow compressors, and axial-flow turbines. Combination of machines with pipes or ducts.
599
Vibrations and Machine Dynamics
Linear vibration theory: free and forced vibration of single- and multi- degree-of-freedom systems; damping in machines; vibration absorbers; experimental modal analysis. Balance of rotating machinery: sources of unbalance, rigid rotors, flexible rotors, critical speeds, balancing principles. Lagrange equations: application to mechanical systems.
603
Physical Fluid Dynamics
Physical phenomena of incompressible fluid motion for a variety of flows, e.g. pipe and channel flow, flow past a cylinder, and convection in horizontal layers. The derivation of the basic equations of fluid mechanics using Cartesian tensor notation. High and low Reynolds number flows including some solutions of the viscous flow equations, inviscid flow, and elementary boundary layer theory. Thermal free convective flows.
605
Combustion Processes
Review of thermodynamics and chemical kinetics of combustion. Fluid mechanics, heat and mass transfer in combustion phenomena. Autoignition and source ignition, flames and detonation. Quenching and explosion hazards, flammability and detonation limits. Heterogeneous combustion, combustion practical systems, combustion as affecting pollution and efficiency, some experimental combustion methods.
607
Mechanics of Compressible Flow
One-dimensional steady and unsteady motion with application to the analysis of supersonic nozzles, diffusers, flow in conduits with friction, shock tubes. Two-dimensional flow of ideal fluid. Small perturbation theory, method of characteristics with application to design of supersonic nozzles. Waves in two-dimensional flow.
613
Research Seminar I
Students will develop written and oral communication skills required to disseminate their technical research results and to receive formative feedback on performance.
615
Instrumentation
Basic principles relating to measurement systems. Static and dynamic characteristics of signals. Measurement system behaviour. Application of probability and statistics to measurement systems. Uncertainty analysis. Data acquisition and conversion, analog/digital signals and associated sampling theory. Application of theory to various measurement systems such as pressure, velocity, strain, concentration, and temperature.
616
Environmental Fluid Mechanics
Overview of fluid mechanics fundamentals; Boundary layer theory; Turbulence theory; Turbulent structures; Simulation of environmental flow and transportation of air pollutants; Dynamics of particulates dispersed in gases; Environmental applications (Two-phase flow and particulate removal; Turbulence and dispersion in low atmosphere).
619
Special Problems
Designed to provide graduate students, especially at the PhD level, with the opportunity of pursuing advanced studies in particular areas under the direction of a faculty member. Students would be required to consider problems of an advanced nature.
620
Geomatics Engineering for Pipeline Systems
Provides both the classical basis to geomatics as a powerful tool in the design and management of pipelines as well as the cutting-edge view of the discipline as a digital technology.
622
Pump and Compressor Stations
Basic role of pump and compressor stations on a pipeline. Design and performance of centrifugal, screw and reciprocating compressors and centrifugal and positive displacement pumps. Design and performance of drivers including gas turbines, engines and electric motors. Design and functions of auxiliary systems, including bearings and lubrication systems, seals and sealing systems and instrumentation and controls. Design studies for acoustic/mechanical and torsional analysis. Pump and compression station equipment and functions.
624
Fundamentals of Pipeline Economics
Provides students with a fundamental understanding of engineering economics, including decision-making processes and life-cycle assessment in application to pipeline systems.
626
Corrosion Science in the Pipelines Industry
Overview of corrosion in the pipeline industry with emphasis on the underlying science, including thermodynamics and kinetics of electrochemical processes, corrosion prevention and mitigation by materials selection, inhibition, coatings and cathodic protection. Implications for integrity management will also be discussed.
628
Pipeline Coatings
Introduction to the fundamental properties and structure of coatings, as well as applications in the pipeline industry. Applications of coating technology in integrity maintenance of the various structural facilities. Computer assisted coatings project management programs will be introduced.
630
Fundamentals of Liquid Hydraulics in Pipeline Systems
Introduction to the fundamentals of liquid hydraulics in pipeline systems. Topics include petroleum fluids, design elements and economics, mechanical design, fluid mechanics fundamentals, pipeline hydraulics, isothermal flow, pumping requirements, centrifugal and reciprocating pumps, operations and maintenance design, and design optimization.
631
Numerical Methods for Engineers
Introduction, mathematical modelling, sources of errors in the process of numerical analysis and solution methodology; Elements of numerical analysis, Taylor series, round-off error, truncation error, concept of stability, consistency and convergence; Linear algebra, normal forms, Gauss elimination method, LU-decomposition, tridiagonal systems of equations; iterative methods, Jacobi, Gauss-Seidel, SOR, SSOR methods, conjugate gradient methods and preconditioning and principles of the multi-grid methods; Elliptic "equilibrium" equation, Laplace and Poisson equations, finite difference and finite control volume concepts and stability analysis; Parabolic equations: explicit, implicit and Crank-Nicolson methods, time-splitting method, method of lines, Stability analysis; Hyperbolic equations; Introduction to other methods; future challenging problems.
632
Fundamentals of Gas Hydraulics in Pipeline Systems
Applications of fundamental fluid mechanics concepts to pipelines conveying compressible media (gases). Strategies for describing the gas-dynamics of pipeline systems and networks are developed, as well as the influence of gas properties and pipeline operating characteristics on component selection and operating parameters.
633
Mathematical Techniques for Engineers
Application of mathematical techniques to the solution of ordinary and partial differential equations arising in engineering problems. Methods that will be considered are: separation of variables, method of characteristics, transform methods and complex variable methods.
634
Pipeline Geotechnical Engineering
Introduction to applications of geotechnical engineering in design and construction of oil and gas pipelines. Geohazard assessment and mitigation methods and issues around pipe/soil interaction will be discussed, as well as the relevant codes, standards and industry guidelines for pipelines.
636
Structural Analysis of Buried Steel Pipeline Systems
An introduction to stress analysis of buried pipelines through hand calculations, spreadsheets, and stress analysis software. Pipeline code requirements are discussed. Individual practices and industry examples are used.
637
Thermal Systems Analysis
Fundamentals of thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, heat transfer and combustion; Modelling of thermophysical properties; Second law of thermodynamics, concept of entropy generation and exergy analysis; Minimizing environmental impact; Advanced design and analysis of heat exchangers, co-generation, renewable energy systems, and propulsion systems.
638
Failure and Fracture Mechanics in the Pipeline Industry
Covers the basic theory of failure and fracture mechanics in sufficient depth to allow its application to pipeline design, material requirements and integrity assessment. Overview of brittle and ductile fracture, fatigue and environmental processes, design basics, fracture mechanics theory, fracture mechanics testing, inspection issues, material issues, crack propagation and arrest, fitness for purpose methods, structural integrity assessment and material requirements.
639
Numerical Methods for Computational Fluid Dynamics
Review of solution techniques for ordinary differential equations. Stability, consistency and convergence. Order of accuracy. Fourier methods for stability. Numerical techniques for one-, two- and three-dimensional linear parabolic problems. Courant condition. Implicit and semi-implicit schemes. Boundary conditions for parabolic problems. Techniques for linear hyperbolic problems. CFL condition. Characteristics, domain of dependence and domain of influence. Boundary conditions for hyperbolic problems. Non-linear conservation laws. The Burger's equation as a test problem. Strong and weak solutions. Conservative and integral forms. Conservative schemes. Entropy condition. Godunov theorem and flux limiters. Godunov, ENO and TVD schemes. Implementation in gas dynamics.
640
Stress Corrosion Cracking of Materials
Fundamentals of stress corrosion cracking (SCC) of materials and the factors contributing to SCC from environmental, metallurgical and mechanical sources. Various testing techniques to study and/or evaluate SCC will also be discussed.
641
Advanced Control Systems
Introduction to multivariable systems; state space models; analysis of linear systems; stability; Cayley-Hamilton theorem; controllability and observability; state feedback control; pole placement designs; introduction to linear optimal control and estimation; Kalman filtering; separation theorem and duality; performance specifications; controller reduction concepts; introduction to robust control.
643
Optimal and Adaptive Control
Discrete time and sampled-data system models and properties; discrete time domain controller design principles; system identification using least-squares analysis; self-tuning control; indirect adaptive control; model reference adaptive control; sliding mode control in continuous and discrete time; optimal design of sliding mode controllers; sensitivity functions and their role in control theoretic performance specification; robust stability and robust performance objectives; Kharitonov stability.
650
Mobile Robotics
Overview of unmanned vehicles, mobile robot locomotion systems, wheeled rovers, walking machines, mobile-manipulators, mobile robot sensors and actuators, simulation, modelling and analysis of mobile robot behaviour, robot-environment interaction analysis, 2D navigation techniques and localization, mobile robot simulation tools.
653
Advanced Continuum Mechanics
Review of linear algebra and tensor analysis; kinematics of the deformation; deformation and strain tensors; strain rates; balance equations and equations of motion; stress principle; stress power and conjugated stress-strain couples; stress rates; elements of Lagrangian and Hamiltonian Mechanics for discrete and continuum systems; thermomechanics and constitutive theory; isotropic and anisotropic hyperelasticity; composite materials.
660
Mechatronics Design Laboratory
A hands-on laboratory experience in the design and analysis of microprocessor-controlled electro-mechanical components. Laboratory projects in which teams will configure, design, and implement mechatronic systems. Aliasing, quantization, electronic feedback, power amplifiers, digital logic, encoder interfacing, and motor control leading to prototyping and design of commercially viable products. Lectures will cover comparative surveys, operational principles, and integrated design issues associated with mechanical, electrical and control components.
663
Advanced Muscle Mechanics and Physiology
A look at problems associated within muscle mechanics and contractility. Also the use of muscle mechanics as a scientific discipline to critically learn and evaluate the scientific process. Basic anatomy and physiology of muscle contraction including the cross-bridge theory, and the force-length, force-velocity and force-time relationships of actively and passively contracting muscles will also be covered.
665
Elements of Materials Engineering
Covers a variety of material aspects and provides a fundamental understanding of Materials Science and Engineering. Emphasizes the understanding of advanced dislocation theory and its application in illustration of diffusion, deformation and fracture of metals. Fundamentals of material strengthening mechanisms are covered. Practical aspects that are relevant to material uses and failures, such as environmental-induced cracking, creep, fatigue, strain aging and corrosion, are discussed. Typical surface analysis techniques for material characterization are introduced.
667
Fracture Mechanics
Basic fracture theory, failure criteria, overview of fracture mechanics, brittle and ductile failure, crack tip parameters, geometric considerations, methods of analysis, fracture toughness and testing standards. Applications in design, fatigue subcritical crack growth, creep and impact.
669
Fatigue of Materials
History and origin of fatigue. Stress life, strain life and fracture mechanics approaches. Low and high cycle fatigue. Low and high temperature fatigue. Combined stresses, initiation, and propagation of cracks. Environmental and statistical effects. Testing techniques and variables. Design and specific material behaviour. Mechanisms of fatigue.
683
Applications of 3D Rigid Body Mechanics in Biomechanics
Applications of 3D motion analysis and rigid body mechanics to musculoskeletal system locomotion, and movement. Experimental, theoretical and numerical methods for optical motion imaging, 3D analysis of joint kinematics and kinetics, joint angle representations, prediction of joint forces, data analysis and filtering, error propagation, inverse and forward dynamics approaches, and applications to clinical and orthopaedic engineering.
685
Biomechanics of Human Movement
Introduction to the measuring methods (accelerometry, goniometry, film and film analysis, video systems) of biomechanical analysis of human movement (force and force distribution). Description of the mechanical properties of bone, tendon, ligaments, cartilage, muscles and soft tissues. The relation between structure and function of biomaterials. Introduction to descriptive analysis of human movement.
698
Graduate Project
Individual project in the student's area of specialization under the guidance of the student's supervisor. A written proposal, one or more written progress reports, and a final written report are required. An oral presentation is required upon completion of the course. Open only to students in the MEng (courses only) program.
708
Turbulence
Provides an overview of turbulence in incompressible flows of Newtonian fluids. Topics include: the nature of turbulence; classical methods of analysis (Reynolds-averaging, spectral representations); the concept of scales; a review of isotropic and homogeneous turbulence; the energy cascade and the role of vorticity in turbulence canonical flows: boundary layers, jets, wakes and mixing layers; modern views of turbulence including coherent motions and inter-scale energy transfer.
713
Research Seminar II
Students will develop written and oral communication skills required to disseminate their technical research results and to receive formative feedback on performance.
Medical Graduate Education
36
601
Business Fundamentals
An overview of the primary business aspects involved in the health care product development industry, including company creation, intellectual property, financing, regulatory and clinical affairs, valuations and exit strategies. The principle objective is to develop a general understanding of how these different aspects integrate to form a functioning business.
602
Intellectual Property and Licensing
A hands-on look at intellectual property and licensing, including reviews of actual biotechnology patents, licenses, and term sheets. Following an overview discussion on intellectual property, a deeper dive into patent and license construction enables the students to craft their own simple patents and license term sheets.
603
Project Management and Corporate Leadership
Presentation of project management tools and techniques and how to build a foundational project plan.  Explanation of corporate, personal and team leadership as well as principles applicable to larger organizations will be discussed.
604
Finances in Biomedical Technology
Explores how the financial community views and values biotechnology business opportunities, and the concepts and skills required to do the financial analysis. Covers some of the issues surrounding the investment process and expectations when interacting with potential investors, reading and analyzing financial statements, estimating and forecasting cash flows, and value investment and financing proposals.
605
Regulatory Affairs
Coverage of the key regulations necessary for biopharmaceutical and medical device manufacturing, how to apply to the regulatory agencies and the consequences of non-compliance in regulatory affairs.
606
Clinical Trials
Review of clinical trials strategies and the regulations around them. An emphasis will be placed on regulatory obligations and current trends.
607
Communication, Marketing and Sales
Introduction to effective strategies for communication to diverse audiences of investors, corporations and clients in the biomedical technology sector, plus consideration of optimal marketing and sales approaches with appropriate channel selection.
608
Business Case Studies
Real life presentations by corporate executives with an emphasis on strategic planning at the highest level, with examples of successes, failures and works in progress. Critical evaluation of publicly traded biotechnology corporations.
609
Business Integration
Integrating lessons learned in prior business modules and extrapolating to the corporate environment, plus business pitches.
621
Anti-tumour Drug Discovery and Current Cancer Therapies
Understanding the effective use of molecular pathology to identify biomarkers and potential targets for modulation. Explore the concepts of targeting stem cells, identification of small molecular weight inhibitors (drug discovery) and the formulation of clinical trials. Major emphasis will be placed on formulating an effective hypothesis and to design preclinical studies that will include cutting-edge ideas on molecular cancer therapeutics.
622
Proteomics and Metabolomics and Cancer Biomarker Discovery
Proteomics and metabolomics will be covered including the objectives of these disciplines, the technologies, methods and informatics used in biological mass spectrometry as applied to the ‘omics. Examples will be drawn from cancer-related disciplines (research or clinical).
623
Tumour Immunology and Immunotherapy
Introductory topics in tumour immunobiology and immunotherapy will be covered. Fundamental and translational topics including, tumour immunogenicity, tumour immune surveillance and editing, immune escape, active immunotherapy, passive immunotherapy, virotherapy and viral vaccines, therapies targeting immunosuppressive mechanisms, and personalized immunotherapy.
624
Cell Cycle Regulation in Cancer and Aging
The links between cancer and aging, the experimental definition of the cell cycle, major events in G0, G1, S, G2, M, drivers and regulators of the cell cycle including oncogenes and tumour suppressors, cyclins, CDKs, CDIs and links to the cell cycle through tumour suppressors will be covered. An overview of biological and replicative aging including recent developments regarding the role of epigenetic modifications in cancer and aging.
625
Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics
Fundamentals of eukaryotic chromatin assembly, dynamic chromatin regulation and post-translational modifications that comprise epigenetics. DNA methylation, histone post-translational modifications, histone variants, regulatory siRNA, nucleosome remodelling and higher-order chromatin organization. Cancer and disease-associated epigenetic alterations will be discussed in detail.
626
DNA Damage Signalling and Repair
DNA repair pathways, highlighting the cellular responses to ionizing radiation will be covered, including: base excision repair, mismatch repair, nucleotide excision repair, and DNA single strand and double strand break repair. The relationship of replication stress and telomere maintenance to genomic instability in a cancer context will be covered.
627
Cancer Cell Biology - Fundamentals and Current Topics
An advanced discussion-based format featuring analysis of the current literature in cancer cell biology with an emphasis on developmental systems. Background in cancer cell biology and signal transduction is essential. Topics include stem cells, cell polarity and migration, endocytosis and mitochondrial biogenesis, and are selected based on the student's research project to enhance their learning experience.
628
Cancer Cell Invasion, Metastasis and Angiogenesis
Angiogenesis, cell invasion and metastasis will be discussed from molecular, cell biological and clinical perspectives. Methods of experimental modelling of metastatic behaviour and angiogenesis, as well as their respective advantages and limitations will be discussed. There will be lab demonstration of available in vitro and in vivo invasion/metastasis/angiogenesis models.
629
Signal Transduction Pathways and Cancer
Fundamental principles of receptor-mediated and intracellular signalling pathways that have implications in cancer biology. Topics focus on receptor tyrosine kinases, serine/threonine kinase receptors and G-protein-coupled receptors.
630
Ethics of Data Analysis and Clinically-Oriented Research
Issues of scientific ethics as it relates to cancer research. Students learn how clinical trials involving human subjects and tissues are designed to gain ethical approval, as well as issues surrounding genomic data analysis and use. The topics of unethical data manipulation, detecting falsified data, experimental replicates and typical cancer research assays will be covered.
631
Neural Development

632
Principles of Light Microscopy

633
Advanced Techniques in Optical Microscopy
Advanced techniques in optical microscopy covered though a combination of lectures and activities. Topics include total internal reflection (TIRF) microscopy, superresolution, light sheet techniques and other rapidly developing technologies. Also includes one or more selected topics in targeted illumination including fluorescence recovery after photo activation (FRAP).
634
Digital Imaging for Optical Microscopy
The concept of the digital image and its relevance to optical microscopy will be introduced. The workflow from image acquisition to image analysis and presentation of data for publication will be covered. Good practices and pitfalls will be emphasized at every step. Students will gain experience in image processing and analysis using the standard open source package FIJI.
651
Microbial Virulence Factors
Virulence factors used by microbial pathogens to cause disease. Topics include microbial adherence mechanisms, toxigenic infections, virulence factor secretion systems, microbial gene expression.
652
Microbial Interactions at Epithelial Surfaces

653
Antimicrobials and Resistance
Mechanism of action of antimicrobials, and resistance genes. Topics will also include transmission of resistance and discovery of new antimicrobials.
654
Infection and Immunity

655
Autoimmunity and Immunodeficiency
Advanced course focusing on the cellular and molecular mechanisms of systemic and organ-specific autoimmunity, acquired immunodeficiencies including those in the context of organ transplantation, and immunomodulatory therapies.
721
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology: Scientific Method, Data Analysis and Communication
Covers landmark discoveries in biochemistry and molecular biology (BMB), new and evolving BMB technologies, and how these can be implemented into modern research programs. Application of the scientific method, technical and ethical considerations surrounding data analysis, and essential skills for communicating scientific discoveries in the realm of peer-reviewed publication, presentation and grant application contexts.
722
Nucleic Acids, DNA Replication, Transcription and RNA Signalling
Covers nucleic acid synthesis, utilization and degradation in cells. Understanding of structure-function relationships for nucleic acids, the enzymatic basis of DNA replication, how genes are read, how the transcribed RNA is processed, and how genes are regulated through a coordinated collaboration between proteins and nucleic acid sequences. Reviews emerging technologies in the study of nucleic acids and RNA at a molecular level.
723
Translation, Protein Folding and Post-Translational Modification
Covers cellular proteins synthesis, modification and degradation. Topics include structure-function relationships for amino acids, the enzymatic basis of protein translation, how ribosomes are synthesized and regulated, how proteins are folded and may be modified post-translationally by enzymatic and non-enzymatic means. Emerging technologies in the study of proteins and post-translational modifications at a molecular level are reviewed.
724
Introduction to Bioinformatics Resources
Covers key bioinformatics concepts and practices, as well as the basic knowledge of how to access resources for graduate-level biologists who are not bioinformatics specialists. Introduces essential bioinformatics terminologies, discusses the use of bioinformatics to infer information about an organism from its genome. Provides practical experience with bioinformatics tools and develop basic skills in the collection and presentation of bioinformatics data.
725
Applied Genomics
Covers high throughput DNA sequencing technologies and genome-wide association genetics. Provides an overview of the available genomics technologies and their applications for high throughput discovery in biology (model organisms) and medicine (cancer and Mendelian disease genomics). Discussions will also encompass research ethics considerations for collecting, storing and using human genomic data.
726
Applied Structural Biology
Students will learn how to describe structures of biological macromolecules and explain the most commonly occurring methods for determination and analysis of the three-dimensional structure of biomolecules. Provides an overview of biophysical and structural methods used to study the regulation and function of biomolecules, tutorials on commonly available structural visualization software and resources and how structure-guided drug design is being used for pre-clinical drug discovery.
755
Directed Studies
Lectures, seminars, term papers or training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods at the advanced level in the medical sciences.
799
Topics in Medical Sciences

Medical Physics
13
623
Radiological Physics and Radiation Dosimetry
Photon and electron interactions, charged particle and radiation equilibrium, cavity theory, absolute and relative dosimetry, calibration protocols.
625
Radiation Oncology Physics
Clinical photon and electron beams, brachytherapy, treatment planning, radiation therapy devices, special techniques.
632
Clinical Rotation in Radiation Oncology Physics
Clinical observation of radiotherapy for cancer. Students observe the treatment process, including immobilization, CT simulation and radiotherapy treatment. Treatments observed include conventional radiotherapy, intensity modulated radiotherapy, total body irradiation, stereotactic radiosurgery, brachytherapy.
633
Radiation Oncology Physics Laboratory
Absorption dose determination, dose descriptors, photon beam modelling, quality control.
637
Anatomy and Statistics for Medical Physicists
Anatomy, physiology, probability, statistical inference, hypothesis testing, regression models, clinical trials, survival analysis.
638
Imaging for Radiation Oncology Physics
An overview of the imaging modalities used for Radiation Oncology including: CT, MRI, planar X-ray, nuclear medicine and ultrasound. Course will cover basic physics, instrumentation and application.
639
Radiobiology and Radiation Safety for Medical Physicists
Cell kinetics, cell survival curves, radiation pathology, fractionation, radiation safety, shielding calculations.
711
Clinical Competency I
Consists of rotations through areas of clinical physics under the supervision of adjunct faculty. Objectives are set, in conjunction with the student, at the commencement of the three rotations comprising this course. Student performance is evaluated by the course mentors at the conclusion of each rotation and by a final oral examination.
712
Clinical Competency II
Consists of rotations through more complex areas of clinical physics under the supervision of adjunct faculty. Objectives are set, in conjunction with the student, at the commencement of the three rotations comprising this course. Student performance is evaluated by the course mentors at the conclusion of each rotation and by a final oral examination.
721
Clinical Projects I
Includes completion of multiple clinical projects in the disciplines of external beam radiotherapy, stereotactic radiosurgery, brachytherapy, and treatment planning. These clinical projects aim to build the student's understanding of implementing advanced technologies in a radiotherapy clinic. Projects have clearly defined objectives established by mutual agreement between the student and project supervisor. The project culminates in written reports and oral presentations.
722
Clinical Projects II
Includes completion of multiple clinical projects in the disciplines of external beam radiotherapy, stereotactic radiosurgery, brachytherapy, and treatment planning. These clinical projects aim to build the student's understanding of implementing advanced technologies in a radiotherapy clinic. Projects have clearly defined objectives established by mutual agreement between the student and project supervisor. The project culminates in written reports and oral presentations.
731
Radiation Oncology Physics Tutorials
Requires the student to prepare written answers to pre-set questions published by the Canadian College of Physicists in Medicine as part of the certification process in Radiation Oncology Physics.
741
Treatment Planning
Designed to nurture knowledgeable and clinically competent treatment planning physicists. Develops background understanding of the mechanisms of dose calculation and radiation deliverability. As well, site specific treatment planning is a focus to ensure students are ready to practice as clinically competent medical physicists. The practical component allows the resident to train under the direct supervision of physicists and dosimetrists.
Medical Science
89
203
Developing Health Research Literacy I

205
Developing Health Research Literacy II
Students will develop their critical thinking skills and their ability to write logically, well-argued research papers. Students will learn the fundamentals of logical reasoning as well as how to analyze theoretical issues in science, medicine, and philosophy.
307
Science, Philosophy and Society
A survey of underlying ideas concerning the objectives, methods, ambitions and responsibilities of the natural and social sciences.
308
Interdisciplinary Research Approaches
An introduction to the questions, methods and research techniques used across the different majors of Biomedical Sciences, Bioinformatics and Health and Society. Sessions will support the development of a broad perspective on health issues and introduce students to the history and the rules governing the ethical conduct of science and research on humans.
321
Introduction to Immunology
This introductory course is designed to expose students to the study of how the immune system encounters, recognizes, and responds to various infectious and pathogenic conditions. Emphasis will not solely focus on how components of the immune system interact with each other to generate an effective host response but also will be placed on how this immune response may be used to generate new therapies for human disease, how evolving and emerging pathogens interact with, and challenge the immune system, and how our knowledge of immunity has impacted society.
341
Principles of Human Genetics
Introduction to principles in human genetics including Mendelian and chromosomal basis of inheritance, chromosomal abnormalities, pedigree analysis, mutations, and molecular, metabolic, population and clinical genetics. Studies of model organisms and genomics will be included as required. Incorporates problem-based learning to establish analytical skills in genetics.
351
Honours Cellular and Molecular Biology
Introduction to principles in cellular and molecular biology. Emphasizes how structure underlies and determines function in the cell and how complex processes are organized and regulated at the molecular level.
397
Independent Studies in Health Sciences
Guided work fostering independent thought, practical research and the completion of written reports for first- and second-year BHSc students. After consultation with a Departmental faculty member who will supervise the chosen problem, an approval form obtained from the BHSc Office must be signed by the Associate Dean (UHSE) before a student can be registered.
401
Bioinformatics
This introductory course will familiarize students with algorithms and computational techniques for bioinformatics applications. Topics to be covered include algorithm and search engines for the analysis of nucleic acid and protein sequences and structures; machine learning techniques for biological data analysis; systems biology approaches for computational modelling.
402
Organismal Biology
Organismal structure from the cellular to the organism level focusing on vertebrates with a particular emphasis on humans. Topics covered include cell biology, histology, vertebrate development and anatomy. This course is inquiry-based and will consist of lectures, small group sessions and interactive laboratory sessions.
403
Computation for Bioinformatics
This advanced course will focus on current computational methods in bioinformatics. Topics will shift as computational methods in bioinformatics shift. Currently, the course will focus on in-depth usage of R and Bioconductor, including reproducible research. Lecture topics will include an introduction to fundamental and idiomatic R constructs and usage and creation of Bioconductor packages.
404
Integrative Human Physiology
Physiology is defined as the study of how living organisms function and encompasses the integration of processes from molecules to the whole-organism. Provides fundamental principles and concepts about the physiology of the major human organ systems.
407
Statistics and Research Design in Health Sciences
An introduction to the study of research design and statistical analysis including a broad overview of the variety of methods for research in health sciences. Students will be introduced to a variety of research tools through lecture and tutorial components.
408
Research Design in Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics
An introduction to the research methods utilized in the Health Sciences. Students will begin to develop the knowledge and skills necessary to conduct research in their respective fields. The importance of research design, qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods and the theoretical constructs that inform these approaches will be emphasized.
409
Brain and Society
Topics will include neuronal mechanisms of addiction, neuronal mechanisms of learning and memory, aging in the human brain and behavioural consequences and mind/brain dichotomy.
415
Introduction to Epidemiology
An introduction to the basic concepts of epidemiology needed to understand and critically analyze research pertaining to health and disease in populations. Methods used in descriptive and analytic epidemiological studies, including the design, analysis and interpretation of results for observational studies and clinical trials will be discussed. Case studies and contemporary events will be used to illustrate epidemiology in action and to highlight the social aspects of applying epidemiology in public health.
417
Integrated Research Course I

419
Integrated Research Course II

501
Principles and Mechanisms of Pharmacology
Basic principles of pharmacology, with specific emphasis on receptor signaling mechanisms. The application of pharmacological principles to the treatment of disease will also be explored.
503
Pharmacology of Organ Systems
Through analysis and discussion of research literature, this course explores topics in pharmacology including the nervous, cardiovascular, renal, respiratory and immune systems, as well as anti-cancer therapies.
507
Special Problems in Medical Science
Lectures, seminars, term papers and training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods.
508
Honours Thesis and Research Communication
Capstone research course in the BHSc to be conducted through any one of the basic research departments. Students would be expected to conduct research. Course also involves weekly small group sessions aimed at building research communication skills. Course culminates with submission of a written thesis that is presented and defended in front of a panel of faculty members in an oral examination.
509
Proteomics
An introductory course to familiarize students with techniques used for protein identification and proteome analysis, including one and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, mass spectrometry and the databases and search engines used in the identification of expressed proteins.
515
Cellular Mechanisms of Disease
The cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying basic human disease processes and how these can be influenced by lifestyle and environmental factors. The ways in which this knowledge can be used in the laboratory diagnosis of disease.
517
Introduction to Biotechnology Business and Profession
An overview of the biotechnology sector from several perspectives: product development, regulatory, intellectual property, market analysis, and finance. This course will include two modules. The first is a series of lectures by faculty and local entrepreneurs to provide the necessary background for the assignments in the second module. The second module will include student-selected case studies and an analysis of a small biotechnology company.
519
Advanced Bioinformatics
Designed to develop student ability to perform bioinformatics analyses of datasets and develop their knowledge of the current literature. The course will emphasize careful study of recent methodologies for chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) dataset analysis. The course will include lectures, literature review sessions and a self-directed bioinformatics research project.
521
Human Anatomy
An inquiry-based exploration of clinically significant human anatomy. The course will follow a systems-based approach, and will make use of multiple learning formats. Each week, the instructor will lead classroom and laboratory sessions that explore an anatomical system from developmental, functional, and clinical perspectives.
528
Independent Studies in Medical Science
Original and independent thought, practical research and the completion of written and oral reports. After consultation with a faculty member who will supervise the chosen problem, an approval form obtained from the BHSc Office must be signed by the Associate Dean (UHSE) before a student can be registered.
535
Psychosocial Oncology
Focuses on developing the understanding in health care practitioners of the central concepts related to caring for cancer patients and their families.
541
Advanced Genetics I
Historical papers will illustrate the foundations of modern genetic principles. Topics including the chromosomal theory of inheritance, the role of pairing and recombination for chromosomal disjunction during meiosis, cytogenetics, the nature of dominant mutations, genetic screens and genetics analysis of developmental pathways. Material covered is drawn from model organisms and humans.
543
Advanced Genetics II
An advanced course in molecular genetic analysis. Topics will vary from year-to-year, but may include identification of the structure, transmission, mutation and molecular pathology of human genes, the use of experimental organisms (chick, fish, fly, mouse, worm) to model human genetic diseases, and molecular studies of human populations and evolution. The focus will be upon applied molecular genetics with recurring emphasis on the theme of relevance to issues in health and society.
545
Genomics
Examine the strategies and techniques, including massively parallel sequencing, used in genomic and genetic studies. Review how model systems and genome editing are used to establish the functional consequences of genomic variation. Students can expect to gain a comprehensive understanding and broad appreciation of the significance of genomic information in context of rare and common human diseases, and genome biology.
561
Cancer Biology
Advances in methodology and in theoretical concepts have permitted continuing breakthroughs in our understanding of the organismal, cellular and molecular biology of cancer cells, and in the development of novel strategies for cancer prevention, diagnosis and treatment. These advances will be presented in a comprehensive overview of cancer including issues of demographics and incidence, causation and detection, origins and progression and therapeutic approaches. Emphasis will be placed on the cell and molecular biology of cancer and on the interaction of the cancer cell with the host organism.
565
Advanced Topics in Microbial Pathogenesis and the Microbiome
Provides a fuller understanding of bacterial diseases using a systems approach and illustrating key paradigms via the consideration of specific pathogens. Topics include: strategies for bacteria surviving host immune responses, bacterial invasion strategies, opportunistic infections, disease Pathogenesis, and antibiotic resistance, challenges of dealing with emerging infections. Lectures, small group interactive sessions, specified readings.
567
Advanced Topics in Immunology
New and emerging themes in immunology, with an emphasis on disease processes such as inflammation in the gut, kidney and lung. Topics include: innate immunity, the inflammasome, sterile inflammation, process and mechanism of immune cell recruitment in different tissues, T cell biology, B cell biology, regulatory immune cells, mucosal immunity, airways responses to virus, mechanisms of food allergies, inflammatory bowel disease. Lectures, small group interactive sessions, specified readings.
569
Advanced Topics in Physiology
Designed for undergraduates with a general understanding of human physiology who wish to pursue advanced topics in a physiological system(s). The physiological system offered will vary from year-to-year and students should contact the instructor for more information prior to enrolling in the course. There will be a review and then build on basic physiological principles through a series of lectures and/or discussion groups. An examination of the specified area of physiology in-depth by introducing students to research methodologies and pathological processes.
603
Biology of Laboratory Animals
Based on the Canadian Council of Animal Care Syllabus "Basic Principles of Laboratory Animal Science for Research Scientists." In addition to the study of common, research, farm and exotic animals, topics covered include ethical considerations, regulation and legislation, animal models, animal facilities and husbandry, hazard control, surgery, anaesthesiology, euthanasia and post-mortem examinations. Practical sessions will provide experience in handling and restraint of specific laboratory animals, injections, blood collection, anaesthesiology and surgery.
604
Integrative Human Physiology
Physiology is the study of how living organisms function and encompasses the integration of processes from molecules to the whole-organism. Designed to provide the student with fundamental principles and concepts about the normal function of the major human organ systems. At the end of this course, the student should be well equipped to apply their acquired knowledge to solve complex physiological problems related to integrative human physiology.
605
Information Storage and Processing in Biological Systems
Examination of complex biological systems; concepts and fundamentals of biological solutions to information storage and processing: modelling and computer simulation of biological systems; information storage in biological molecules; genetic networks; hierarchical organization of biological information processing in signal transduction, development, evolution, and ecology; biological control systems.
609
Gene Expression

611
Medical Microbiology
The basic principles of medical microbiology and the pathogenesis of infectious disease and of clinically important microbial pathogens including bacteria, viruses, parasites and fungi. Recent concepts will be described and students will be expected to present and critically discuss research advances of their choosing from the current research literature.
613
Advanced Studies in Microbiology

619
Neurosciences

620
Topics in Systems Physiology
Designed for students undertaking research in physiology or related disciplines with only limited prior exposure to the discipline. Introduces and discusses fundamental and current issues in physiology ranging from the basic physiological systems through to translational clinical topics. Encompasses the basic physiological mechanisms with emphasis on the role of the autonomic nervous system. Subject areas will include basic physiology of the cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, renal, endocrine and reproductive systems.
621
Principles of Drug Action

622
Neurobiology of Mental Illness
Students are exposed to up-to-date research regarding the neurobiological theories of various mental illnesses (such as depression, anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, etc.). The seminar format will involve discussion in both research and review articles. The focus of discussion will be on both preclinical research and clinical studies that shed insight into the neurobiology of mental illnesses or their treatments.
623
Respiratory Science and Critical Illness

624
Neuroanatomy
Detailed introduction to neuroanatomy using Homo sapiens as the primary experimental species but relying on other vertebrates for additional details. Detailed anatomic aspects of each major brain region, along with major connections and functions related to those regions will be presented. Laboratories will examine gross specimens, virtual microscopic images, and other anatomic images.
629
Cardiovascular Dynamics

631
Muscle Physiology
Contractile processes, excitation-contraction coupling, the control of contraction and energetics in smooth, cardiac and skeletal muscle. Molecular studies of the contractile process and of the process of excitation contraction coupling.
633
The Kidney

635
Psychosocial Oncology
A seminar-based course focusing on the possible causes of psychosocial problems in cancer patients and families (medical, psychological and social) and also on how patients and families are helped through the difficult transitions resulting from a cancer diagnosis, treatment, recurrent disease, and end of life care.
636
Advanced Topics in Physiology
Provides a general understanding in physiological systems and will present advanced topics in specified physiological system(s) for further depth of understanding. Review and build on basic physiological principles through a series of lectures and discussion groups and will examine a specified area of physiology in-depth by introducing students to research methodology and pathological processes in the system.
637
Gastrointestinal Physiology

638
Mucosal Pathophysiology
Focuses on the physiology and pathophysiology of the gastrointestinal tract, lung and other mucosal tissues. A particular emphasis will be placed on inflammatory processes in these tissues, and how they contribute to symptom generation and tissue dysfunction. Involves independent research on the part of the students, small group sessions, written assignments and class presentations
639
Immunology

640
Introduction to Immunology
Introductory immunology for graduate students who have no background in immunology in their undergraduate studies. It provides a comprehensive overview of the immune responses: antibody-antigen interaction, antibody structure, genetics and synthesis, cellular immunology, MHC, phagocytosis, and tolerance. Using this basic understanding of fundamental immune processes the involvement of the immune response in autoimmunity, hypersensitivity, tissue rejection, tumor immunology, vaccine production, viral, bacterial, fungal and parasitic infections will be discussed. Additionally, methods for the study of immunology will be covered.
641
Genetics

663
Advanced Muscle Mechanics and Physiology
A look at problems associated within muscle mechanics and contractility. Also the use of muscle mechanics as a scientific discipline to critically learn and evaluate the scientific process. Basic anatomy and physiology of muscle contraction including the cross-bridge theory, and the force-length, force-velocity and force-time relationships of actively and passively contracting muscles will also be covered.
670
Practicum in Biomedical Technology
A six unit (full) course carried out in an academic or industrial setting for a period of at least twelve weeks. Students have an opportunity to apply the principles and methods of investigation learned during the Master of Biomedical Technology program and carry out related research. Practicum projects can be focused on any of the following aspects of the commercialization process: patent filing, research and development, business development, manufacturing to clinical trials, marketing and sales.
671
Techniques in Medical Science
Introduction to the theory of operation of electronic devices commonly used in biophysical studies including principles of amplifiers and filters, micro- and patch electrode techniques and computer-laboratory interfacing.
673
Careers in Biotechnology
A series of talks and workshops designed to provide students with practical knowledge of the biotechnology industry. In collaboration with the University of Calgary Career Services, the course covers personal and professional development planning, resume writing, networking, negotiation and interviewing skills and job search strategies specifically for the biotechnology field. This course runs during the fall and winter block weeks with additional retreat days throughout the year.
674
Integrated Systems Course

675
Bioinformatics Resources for the Biologist
This introductory graduate level course will familiarize biologists with algorithms and search engines used to analyze nucleic acid and protein sequences and structures.
676
Scripting and Database Querying for Molecular Biologists
Intended for biologists who wish to improve their bioinformatics analysis capabilities by learning just a small amount of query and programming syntax. The focus is on practicality rather than programming theory. The course explores how to use existing tools (on the command-line and on the Web) to gather and process large datasets all at once, rather than doing many individual analyses manually.
677
Directed Study in Biomedical Technology
Lectures, seminars, term papers or training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods at the advanced level in biomedical technology or medical sciences.
678
Project in Biomedical Technology
Covers basic principles of project management as well as biotech lab theory and practical aspects. Includes commercial technology reviews, tours, demos and practical labs. Includes development of the scientific aspects of a project based on a disease, pharmaceutical, or device of current interest, culminating in a poster presentation and business pitch of the science and business aspects.
679
Fundamentals of Bioinformatics
Foundational techniques and current research in bioinformatics are explored. Topics covered will include large-scale programmatic data access via data-marts and genome browsers, visualization, statistical techniques, and analysis of sequence and ‘omics datasets.
685
Biomechanics of Human Movement
Introduction to the measuring methods (accelerometry, goniometry, film and film analysis, video systems) of biomechanical analysis of human movement (force and force distribution). Description of the mechanical properties of bone, tendon, ligaments, cartilage, muscles, and soft tissues. The relation between structure and function of biomaterials. Introduction in descriptive analysis of human movement.
689
Medical Imaging

701
Advanced Topics in Reproductive Health
A series of topics, ranging from basic sciences to clinical topics (including ethical issues) to increase awareness and comprehension regarding current issues in reproductive health.
703
Human Anatomy: Concepts, Exploration and Teaching
Introductory course for graduate students with an interest in mammalian morphology to human cadaver dissection, human anatomy concepts and teaching strategies within the medical professional curriculum. Weekly lectures and discussions supplement a cadaver dissection-based course intended for students interested in pursuing an academic career in a medically related field.
706
Theory and Practice of Family Therapy

707
Family Therapy Practicum

708
Theory and Practice of Interprofessional Psychosocial Oncology
Provides graduate students with a multidisciplinary introduction to the field of psychosocial oncology. Emphasis will be placed on understanding and interpreting the experience of cancer informed by theory, evidence and illness narratives. Case-based learning in small interprofessional groups will allow students to explore a variety of key learning themes relevant to psychosocial oncology including distress assessment, depression, anxiety, adjustment and coping, sexuality, loss and grief. Attention to diversity will be integrated throughout the course.
710
Business and Careers in Biotechnology

713
Topics in Mountain Medicine and High Altitude Physiology
A tutorial-based course focused on high altitude medicine and physiology. The aim of the course is to introduce the students to the physiological adaptations of, and pathophysiology associated with, the hypoxia of altitude. Students will be introduced to several diseases associated with the hypoxia of high altitude (i.e., Acute Mountain Sickness; High Altitude Pulmonary Edema, High Altitude Cerebral Edema), and the pathophysiology underlying these diseases.
721
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Discussions and presentations in a small group format will highlight historical and recent developments in analysis of eukaryotic genomes and control of gene expression, chromosome structure, translation, protein structure, proteomics, regulatory networks and related technologies and their applications to the study of human diseases. Additional learning objectives relate to the critical assessment of published literature as well as the development of research proposal writing and presentation skills.
722
The Blood Vessel

740
Smooth Muscle Structure Function

744
Human Pathology
The principles of basic pathology, including cellular responses to injury, inflammation, tissue reaction, hemodynamic, basic genetics, and neoplasia are taught through a series of interactive lectures and seminars which are applied to examine the human system and the diseases that affect it.
745
Human Histology
Normal histology of the human body and how it relates to the pathologic mechanisms of function and disease will be discussed and presented in small group format.
746
Integrated Pathologists’ Assistant Skills
A series of discussions and workshops to solidify the knowledge gained throughout the Pathologists’ Assistant Master’s program that will provide practical knowledge of the Pathologists’ Assistant profession, in particular focusing on laboratory management skills, quality control and quality assurance, and the legal and accreditation requirements for medical laboratories.
747
Pediatric Pathology Practicum
Practical training in the technical skills of grossing a surgical specimen from the pediatric population in a safe and appropriate manner, as well as grossing placentas and performing fetal autopsies.  Skill development will include quality management, ancillary techniques, and medical photography.
748
Surgical Pathology Practicum

749
Autopsy Pathology Practicum

750
Pathologists' Assistant Research Project

751
Topics in Medical Science

755
Directed Study
Lectures, seminars, term papers or training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods at the advanced level in the medical sciences.
Medicine
32
320
Medical Skills
The fundamental elements of history-taking and physical examinations, basic procedures (e.g., suturing), as well as other essential skills necessary for functioning as physicians, such as ethical analysis, social health issues, teamwork, and self-care.
330
Family Medicine Clinical Experience

340
Population Health
Concepts of health and disease as they apply to populations, communities and individual patients. The determinants of health and the distribution of disease within and between populations will be explored. The roles of health promotion, health protection and disease prevention will be presented. Students will learn about the evolution and function of the Canadian health-care system in the context of current and historic challenges and international alternatives. Basic epidemiology and biostatistics as they apply to the core concepts of the course will be covered. Community experience with individuals and social/medical agencies is a core part of this course.
345
Applied Evidence-Based Medicine I
Critical appraisal of literature and application of evidence to practice. An introduction to evidence-based medicine concepts and applications. Options for electives include a research project, directed study project, or clinical experience where critical appraisal skills are used to address questions related to prognosis, diagnosis and/or treatment.
350
Introduction to Medicine, Blood and Gastrointestinal Course
Integrated clinical presentations related to the blood and gastrointestinal systems. Students will learn how to diagnose, investigate and manage patients presenting with such clinical presentations as fever, anemia, bruising and bleeding, weight loss, difficulty swallowing, abdominal pain, jaundice, diarrhea, etc. General principles of medicine as a whole will be presented, including concepts of history and physical examination taking, as well as principles of investigations such as test sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive value. This course will also introduce fundamental concepts of anatomy, histology, pathology and radiology. An approach to problems in infectious diseases and information regarding self-protection equipment and skills is provided.
360
Integrated Musculoskeletal and Dermatology Course
Integrated clinical presentations related to the musculoskeletal system and dermatology. Students will learn musculoskeletal anatomy as well the principles of diagnosis, investigation and management of clinical presentations such as painful limb, joint pain, fractures and dislocations, skin lesions, etc.
370
Integrated Cardiovascular and Respiratory Course
Integrated clinical presentations related to the cardiovascular and respiratory systems. Students will learn how to diagnose, investigate and manage clinical presentations such as chest pain, loss of consciousness, palpitations, shock, heart murmur, shortness of breath, cough, sore throat, etc.
402
Second Year Elective
The student selects an area of medicine of particular interest for more in-depth study. Studies may be done in centres other than Calgary. Students are encouraged to consider experiences in developing world nations through the International Electives Program. All experiences must be evaluated by a preceptor.
410
Integrated Renal-Electrolyte and Endocrine-Metabolic Course
Integrated clinical presentations related to the renal and endocrine systems. Students will learn how to diagnose, investigate and manage clinical presentations such as acute and chronic renal failure, generalized edema, hypertension, abnormal electrolytes, neck mass, abnormalities of blood lipids, diabetes, etc.
420
Medical Skills

430
Family Medicine Clinical Experience

440
Applied Evidence-Based Medicine
Provides an opportunity to explore in depth an area of particular interest to each student. Students under the supervision of a preceptor may complete a research project. Others may pursue a clinical experience utilizing critical appraisal skills to address questions related to prognosis, investigation and/or treatment. Alternatively, students may pursue supervised electives in such areas as History of Medicine, Pathology, Health Economics, Community Health, Palliative Care, Rehabilitation Medicine, etc. Concepts of clinical informatics and evidence-based medicine (including critical appraisal) will also be presented.
445
Applied Evidence-Based Medicine II

450
Integrated Neurosciences, Special Senses and Aging Course
Integrated clinical presentations related to the neuroscience system, special senses, pain, palliative care and aging. Students will learn how to diagnose, investigate and manage clinical presentations such as muscle weakness, head and spinal injuries, gait disturbance, dizziness, speech and language disturbance, seizures, acute confusion, headache, dementia, falls, acute and chronic pain, dying patient, visual loss, double vision, ear pain, hearing loss, etc.
460
Children and Women's Health
Integrated clinical presentations related to reproductive medicine and paediatrics. Students will learn how to diagnose, investigate and manage pregnancy, contraception, pelvic pain and associated diseases, infertility, and breast concerns. An overview of paediatric topics are presented, including the well and unwell newborn, the pre-term infant, common childhood infectious diseases, typical paediatric ambulatory problems, developmental disorders, paediatric emergency medicine, and an introduction to genetics.
470
Psychiatry
Students will learn how to diagnose, investigate and manage clinical presentations such as substance abuse and drug addiction, suicidal behaviour, panic and anxiety, psychosis, mood disorders, personality disorders, etc.
480
Integrative Course I
Students work in small groups with a tutor and standardized patients (actors), further improve skills in interviewing, communication, physical examination, diagnosing and patient management. Basic science and clinical information across organ systems are integrated with an emphasis on clinical problem-solving ability.
485
Integrative Course II

490
Introduction to Clinical Practice I
Prepare for clinical rotations by learning and practicing knowledge, skills, and attitudes relevant to all specialties. Students are immersed in practical, hands-on sessions, where unique teaching methodologies such as simulation, role-playing, and gamification enhance student engagement and learning retention. Topics include acute care approaches, teamwork skills, patient safety, communication skills, and interpretation of diagnostic results.
495
Introduction to Clinical Practice II

500
Clinical Re-orientation
Clinical re-orientation allows students who are transferring from another program or who have had an extended time away from the Medical Doctor Program. Participation in this course will be part of the students’ return to their study learning plan and will include interviewing, physical examinations and evaluations in clinical settings as required.
502
Family Medicine

504
Internal Medicine

506
Surgery

508
Paediatrics

510
Psychiatry

512
Obstetrics and Gynaecology

514
Clerkship Electives

515
Extended Clerkship Electives

516
Anaesthesia

520
Comprehensive Clinical Skills Curriculum for Clerkship
Integrate basic and clinical science, improve diagnostic reasoning, communication and clinical skills, and apply knowledge gained during the foundational courses in medicine to the clinical setting. Content covered using a variety of formats, including high-fidelity simulation, standardized patients, small group cases, didactic lectures, and procedural workshops. Content is delivered over a 48-week period spanning the duration of the clerkship year.
522
Emergency Medicine

Museum and Heritage Studies
7
201
Introduction to Museum and Heritage Studies
Introduces the field of Museum and Heritage Studies by examining heritage sites, museums, art galleries, zoos, natural parks and others. Traditional institutions will be examined along with new forms, including virtual museums.
331
Collections and Exhibitions in Museum and Heritage Institutions
Examines the nature of collecting, curating, exhibiting and interpreting material and non-material culture in museums and heritage institutions.
333
Ethics in Museum and Heritage Studies
Introduction to ethics in museums and heritage studies. An examination of some recent museums and heritage resources crises. Also museum/heritage processes including the acquisition of artifacts, exhibitions and the representation of indigenous and other minority peoples, interpretation, the appropriateness of conservation, and museum management.
401
Topics in Museum and Heritage Studies
An examination of selected topics in Museum and Heritage Studies.
433
Management and Planning in Museum and Heritage Institutions
Examines theoretical and practical issues relating to the management of museum and heritage resources. Topics may include: exhibition planning, human resources, ethics and social responsibility, fundraising, collections, and audience development etc.
501
Research in Selected Topics
Supervised individual study of a special topic.
533
Practicum
Placement at a museological or heritage institution.
Music
73
105
Music Listening

127
Class Piano
Functional approach to the piano.
203
Jazz History
Directed listening and analysis of jazz forms from the early beginnings of jazz to the present. Styles examined range from Early Jazz to Jazz-Rock Fusion. Major figures considered include: Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Lester Young, Charlie Parker, Miles Davis and John Coltrane.
209
Introduction to Music Theory for Non-Majors
Introduction to the materials of music through development of both aural and written skills.
211
Materials of Music
Investigation of the fundamental processes of music through analytical and written exercises.
213
Diatonic Harmony
Part-writing and analysis with an emphasis on diatonic harmony and modulation in the music of the eighteenth century.
221
Performance Practicum I
Applied instruction in instrument or voice.
223
Performance Practicum II
Continuation of applied instruction in instrument or voice.
225
Musicianship I
Development of skills in rhythm, intonation and sight-singing. Performance of two-part contrapuntal exercises with diatonic modulation.
255
Introduction to Music Technology
An exploration of current technology for music making and appreciation including recording hardware and software, MIDI-based devices for integration with sound systems and interactive/media performance, audio file formats, score preparations and basic audition theory.
306
Topics in Music and Popular Culture
Selected topics examining popular music from a critical perspective. Examines the meaning and messages of popular music and its impact on present-day culture. Topics may include the examination of the work of specific creators or performers, the recording industry, the impact of specific instruments (e.g. guitar, percussion, electronic media, etc.), or cross-cultural influences. Attendance at relevant musical concerts and lectures may be required.
307
Topics in World Music
Selected topics examining non-western musical traditions from a historical, sociological, analytical or performative perspective. Topics may include the study of particular musical traditions and repertoire or the study of an instrument or performance practice that appears among many traditions (e.g., hand-drumming). Attendance at relevant musical concerts and lectures may be required.
308
Topics in Composers and Musical Culture
In-depth study of selected composers, their music, and their relationship to intellectual history (e.g., Mozart and the French Revolution), and/or examination of specific western or non-western musical cultures (e.g., Music in India, Music in post-war Germany) and their impact.
309
The Art of Music Listening
An introduction to the sensuous and structural elements of music, leading to a greater appreciation for the art of music in a global multi-cultural context.
311
Chromatic Harmony
Part-writing and analysis with an emphasis on chromatic harmony and modulation in the music of the nineteenth century.
313
Materials of Twentieth-Century Music
Compositional and analytical approaches to post-tonal music from the twentieth century to the present.
321
Performance Practicum III
Continuation of applied instruction in instrument or voice.
323
Performance Practicum IV
Continuation of applied instruction in instrument or voice.
325
Musicianship II
Further development of skills in rhythm, intonation and sight-singing. Performance of two-part contrapuntal exercises with chromatic modulation. Introduction to atonal exercises.
327
Second Instrument Study

329
Jazz Musicianship
Musicianship in the jazz idiom, stressing the aural perception of jazz scales and modes, seventh-chord and harmonic extensions, common jazz progressions and jazz rhythms.
334
Music History and Literature I
Music from antiquity to 1789.
336
Music History and Literature II
Music from 1789 to the present.
341
Composition I
Basic compositional techniques, and study of selected twentieth-century compositions.
343
Composition II
Continued study of compositional techniques and study of selected twentieth-century compositions.
351
Sonic Arts
An introduction to the creative use of computers and digital media in sonic arts.
355
Sound Recording
An introduction to the practice and theory of sound and music recording.
415
Form and Analysis
Investigations into hierarchical relations in music. Study of how various levels of musical structure relate in order to form a whole.
417
Advanced Harmonic Analysis
Investigation of the expanded harmonic resources and analytical systems used by composers from the late nineteenth century to the present.
421
Performance Practicum V
Continuation of applied instruction in instrument or voice.
423
Performance Practicum VI
Continuation of applied instruction in instrument or voice.
427
Professional Seminar in Music Performance I
Practical experience in music performance in a team teaching master class format.
429
Jazz Improvisation
Topics in jazz improvisation, stressing improvisational tools, melody, rhythm, and ear development for the blues progression.
441
Composition III
Advanced creative work with an emphasis upon either chamber music composition or studio composition.
443
Composition IV
Continued advanced creative work with an emphasis upon either chamber music composition or studio composition.
445
Counterpoint
Practical study of contrapuntal technique, including species counterpoint and eighteenth-century counterpoint.
447
Orchestration
Practical study of instrumentation and scoring, including orchestral and wind ensemble textures.
451
Electroacoustic Music
Practical study of electroacoustic and computer music with an emphasis on creative work in the medium.
453
Computer Applications in Music
Use of computers in music composition, performance, education and interdisciplinary media.
462
Junior Performance Project
Applied instruction in instrument or voice in connection with junior recital.
511
Selected Topics in Theory and Composition
Advanced topics in music theory and composition selected from such subjects as: analysis of tonal or post-tonal music, rhythmic analysis, acoustics, critical approaches to music theory, electroacoustic music, orchestration, counterpoint and fugue.
513
Seminar in Theory and Composition
Creative and analytic approaches to the study of selected repertoire with an emphasis upon contemporary music.
521
Performance Practicum VII
Continuation of applied instruction in instrument or voice.
523
Performance Practicum VIII
Continuation of applied instruction in instrument or voice.
525
Topics in Music Performance
Various topics such as applied music literature, piano, wind or string pedagogy, or vocal pedagogy, phonetics.
527
Professional Seminar in Music Performance II
Continued practical experience in music performance in a team teaching master class format.
531
Research Techniques and Bibliography of Music
Exploring the basic reference materials and techniques for musical research in all areas.
533
Selected Topics in Musicology
A specific musical medium or genre: may include chamber music literature, symphonic literature, dramatic literature and program music.
535
Studies in the Music of Selected Composers
Specific composers or groups of composers; may include Beethoven, Debussy, the Second Viennese School, etc.
551
Networked Music Performance
Investigation of music performance on high-speed networks.
560
Senior Project
Major research or creative project in an area of musical study.
561
Independent Study
Individual study in a selected area of music.
562
Senior Performance Project
Applied instruction in instrument or voice in connection with a Senior Recital.
611
Selected Topics in Theory and Composition
Various topics (master's level).
613
Seminar in Theory and Composition
Advanced creative and analytic approaches to the study of selected repertoire with an emphasis upon contemporary music.
615
Pedagogy of Music Theory
Refining ideas about music theory and its teaching, while developing and strengthening teaching skills.
621
Advanced Performance Practicum I
Applied instruction in instrument or voice.
623
Advanced Performance Practicum II

625
Topics in Music Performance
Various topics such as applied music literature, applied pedagogy, accompanying, phonetics and others.
629
Studies at the Banff Centre
Advanced music studies.
631
Research Techniques and Bibliography of Music
Exploring the basic reference materials and techniques for musical research at the graduate level.
633
Selected Topics in Musicology
Various topics such as history of music theory, analysis, notation, or performance practice may be offered. Consult the timetable for current topic.
641
Composition

645
Composition Seminar

651
Selected Topics in Electroacoustic Music
Advanced topics in computer music selected from such subjects as: analysis, theory and aesthetics of electroacoustic repertoire, computer programming and software design, interactivity, performance practice and interpretation, sound morphology, sound spatialization, sound synthesis, soundscape studies, tele-media.
653
Projects in Computer Music
Individual and collaborative creative and research projects in computer music.
661
Independent Study
Individual study in a selected area of music.
711
Advanced Topics in Theory and Composition
Various topics (doctoral level).
733
Selected Topics in Musicology
Various topics in the field of Musicology (doctoral level).
741
Composition
Individual study in musical composition (doctoral level).
751
Advanced Topics in Electroacoustic Music
Advanced topics in computer music selected from such subjects as: interactivity, tele-media, sound morphology, sound spatialization, analysis, theory and aesthetics, performance practice and interpretation, computer programming and software design, sound synthesis, soundscape studies.
753
Advanced Projects in Computer Music
Individual and collaborative creative and research projects in computer music.
761
Independent Study
Individual study in a selected area of music (doctoral level).
Music Education
15
331
Conducting I
Basic conducting techniques with the use of the baton; simple and condensed scores for selected choral and instrumental works.
333
Conducting II

341
Popular Music Pedagogy
Strategies for integrating popular music into the curriculum, including popular music listening strategies, pedagogical approaches and hand-on experience with modern band instruments including guitar, bass, keyboard, drum set, vocals and technology.
401
Instrumental and Band Techniques I
Performing and teaching techniques for instruments used in the schools.
403
Instrumental and Band Techniques II

413
Vocal Music in the School: Teaching Methods and Materials
Introduction to a comprehensive vocal program for elementary and secondary classrooms, including teaching methods and materials.
415
Vocal Music in the School: Curriculum and Teaching Strategies

417
Topics in Music Education
Various topics such as advanced band techniques and literature, choral techniques and literature, philosophy and foundation of music education or jazz for the classroom.
555
Independent Study
Individual study in a selected music education area.
655
Independent Study
Individual study in a selected music education area.
671
Selected Topics in School Music
Selected topics with emphasis upon practical application relevant to the field of music education. Various topics are regularly offered under this title, such as early childhood, Kodaly pedagogy, administration of school music programs and techniques of school music supervision.
695
Practicum in School Music I
Practical application of teaching techniques studied in graduate level school music courses. Will include various topics such as early childhood, Kodaly, choral and instrumental.
697
Practicum in School Music II

755
Independent Study
Individual directed study in an area of Music Education (doctoral level).
771
Selected Topics in Music Education
Selected topics with emphasis upon practical application relevant to the field of Music Education. Possible topics may include early childhood musical development, Kodaly pedagogy, folk music studies, choral and instrumental pedagogy and the role of new technologies within the discipline.
Music Performance
31
201
Chamber Choir
Performing experience in the Chamber Choir.
203
Women's Choir
Performing experience in the Women's Choir.
205
University Chorus
Performing experience in the University Chorus.
211
Symphonic Band
Performing experience in the Symphonic Band.
213
Wind Ensemble
Performing experience in the Wind Ensemble.
215
University Orchestra
Performing experience in the University Orchestra.
221
Collegium Musicum
Performance of instrumental and vocal music written before 1750.
223
Vocal Jazz Ensemble
Performance of popular vocal literature.
225
Instrumental Jazz Ensemble
Performance in a jazz combo or band.
227
New Music Ensemble
Performance of chamber music written since 1960.
229
World Music Ensemble
Performing experience of various world music traditions.
241
Chamber Music
Performance of music for small ensembles.
245
Voice Lab
Performance projects involving vocal music (opera, art song, music theatre, baroque, new music), and an exploration of interarts and interdisciplinary connections through performance creation.
301
Chamber Choir
Performing experience in the Chamber Choir.
303
Women's Choir
Performing experience in the Women's Choir.
305
University Chorus
Performing experience in the University Chorus.
311
Symphonic Band
Performing experience in the Symphonic Band.
313
Wind Ensemble
Performing experience in the Wind Ensemble.
315
University Orchestra
Performing experience in the University Orchestra.
321
Collegium Musicum
Performance of instrumental and vocal music written before 1750.
323
Vocal Jazz Ensemble
Performing experience in the Vocal Jazz Ensemble.
325
Instrumental Jazz Ensemble
Performing experience in the Instrumental Jazz Ensemble.
327
New Music Ensemble
Performing experience in the New Music Ensemble.
329
World Music Ensemble
Performing experience in the World Music Ensemble.
341
Chamber Music
Performing of music for small ensembles.
345
Voice Lab
Performance projects involving vocal music (opera, art song, music theatre, baroque, new music), and an exploration of interarts and interdisciplinary connections through performance creation.
632
Advanced Choral Conducting

634
Advanced Instrumental Conducting

641
Advanced Chamber Ensemble I
Intensive coaching in chamber ensembles.
643
Advanced Chamber Ensemble II

645
Voice Lab
Performance projects involving vocal music (opera, art song, music theatre, baroque, new music), and an exploration of interarts and interdisciplinary connections through performance creation.
Nanoscience
6
301
Introduction to Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
Functional definitions of nanoscience and nanotechnology. Understanding/predicting the behaviour of nanomaterials. Investigation of nanomaterials whose properties depend on size. Exploration of a building up approach to design and fabrication of functional nanomaterials. Examination of applications of nanoscience and nanotechnology in society.
401
Design in Nanoscience

443
Quantum World of Nanoscience
Using nanotechnology examples, the fundamentals of quantum mechanics that are relevant to nanoscience and nanotechnology are covered.
502
Nanoscience Methods
This lab/tutorial course will place the students in a nanotechnology setting. Students will design and execute self-directed projects and will present results to their peers.
511
Integration of Nanotechnology and Biology for Medical Applications
The use of nanoscience and nanotechnology principles for medical applications in diagnostics and therapy will be explored in lectures, student presentations and group projects.
599
Special Problems in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
A discussion of current topics in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. This seminar course will place the student in a setting where best practices of scientific presentation are imparted through giving presentations related to Nanoscience
Neuroscience
17
201
Introduction to Neuroscience
A survey of clinical, cognitive, behavioural, systems, cellular and molecular neuroscience, with emphasis on applied, translational, and basic research.
301
Neuroscience Field Course
Introductory ethology and behavioural neuroscience research. Hypothesis generation, experimental design, data collection and analysis, techniques, and experimentation.
321
How the Brain Works
An introduction to the fundamentals of brain function for students outside of the Neuroscience program. Students completing this course will be able to describe the molecular, cellular and systems underpinnings of nervous systems. Students will be able to discuss the functioning of brain systems underlying sensation, cognition, behaviour, and disease.
401
Advanced Neuroscience Laboratory
Advanced neurophysiological, behavioural, molecular biological, and histological techniques used to investigate nervous system function will be covered. The course is delivered in the form of hypothesis-driven research projects.
411
Cellular and Systems Neuroscience
Structure and function of the nervous system examined through neurochemistry, intracellular signal transduction, mechanisms of communication, and functional organization of the nervous system at the cellular and systems levels.
421
Neuroscience: History, Ethics and Society
An exploration of topics in the history of neuroscience, aspects of ethics as they apply to studies of the brain and how neuroscience fits into society.
474
Neuroscience of Learning and Memory
An examination of learning and memory from a neuroscience perspective. Molecular, cellular, systems level, and behavioural approaches will be applied to themes such as consolidation, amnesia, and pathological processes.
475
Drugs and Behaviour
The behavioural effects of drugs specifically employed to affect the nervous system, as seen in the treatment of mental disorders, behavioural disorders, and other conditions such as Parkinson's, Huntington's and Alzheimer's diseases. Neuro-pharmacologic agents will be discussed as they relate to the biochemistry and physiology of putative neurotransmitters.
477
Sleep and Biological Rhythms
Behaviours are temporally co-ordinated and occur in a rhythmic fashion. The most obvious rhythmic behaviour humans engage in is sleeping; we spend one-third of our lives asleep. This course will survey the behavioural, physiological, and clinical aspects of sleep and biological rhythms.
478
Behavioural Neuroscience
An examination of the neural underpinnings of behaviour. Experimental approaches, neural mechanisms, and health implications will be explored through both lecture material and laboratory exercises.
479
Human Neuropsychology
Integration of the literature on human brain damage with the evidence from animal research. Topics include developmental neuropsychology; cognitive deficits associated with frontal, parieto-occipital, and temporal lobes; origins and mechanisms in the determination of cerebral dominancy; disorders of learning and memory; long-term effects of cerebral lesions.
500
Honours Thesis in Neuroscience
Research project undertaking critical assessment of data collected testing and hypothesis derived from the literature. To be conducted under the direction of one or more faculty members from departments participating in the Neuroscience program. Formal written and oral reports must be presented on completion of the course.
506
Special Topics in Neuroscience
Lectures, seminars, term papers and training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods.
507
Special Topics in Neuroscience
Lectures, seminars, term papers and training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods.
511
Neuroscience Seminar
Students will attend the weekly Hotchkiss Brain Institute seminars. Following each seminar, students will discuss the presentation under the tutelage of a moderator familiar with the field of enquiry.
521
Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience
An examination of how the human central nervous system controls higher order, complex behaviours. Experimental and clinical evidence for the neurobiological regulation of memory, language, attention, perception and emotion will be evaluated.
531
Nervous System Development
This course covers the fundamental principles of the development of nervous systems, integrating anatomical, cellular, molecular, genetic and behavioural approaches.
Nursing
104
201
Introduction to Nursing
Basic concepts of nursing, individual, family, community, health, environment, and the relationships among them. Historical development of the nursing profession, its unique position within the health-care system, and the roles of various health-care providers.
203
Foundations for Nursing Practice
Development of skills applicable to nursing practice.
205
Therapeutic Interventions
Nursing therapeutics and pharmacology in wellness and illness states across the lifespan.
207
Nursing Inquiry
Continuing development of a conceptual framework for nursing practice. Development of a theoretical base for understanding various human responses to health experiences.
209
Nursing Practice
Continuing development of skills for nursing practice with opportunity to apply assessment, psychomotor and communication skills in the helping relationship.
211
Health Assessment
Knowledge and basic skills needed to complete a health history and a holistic assessment of healthy individuals. Students will practice health assessment skills on each other.
213
Consolidation Practicum I
Integration of learning and continuing development of professional relationships with individuals and families experiencing health challenges in selected settings.
221
Human Anatomy and Physiology I
The use of lecture and laboratory approaches to introduce students to the study of the human body. It begins with introductory concepts related to terminology and basic chemical processes, then examines cellular physiology and tissues, and subsequently reviews the integumentary, skeletal, muscular, and nervous systems.
222
Human Anatomy and Physiology II
A review of some of the important concepts from Human Anatomy and Physiology I and then examines the endocrine, cardiovascular, respiratory, digestive, urinary and reproductive systems. Physiological processes that contribute to body defences (the immune system) as well as metabolism and temperature regulation are also covered.
223
Foundational Concepts in Nursing Practice I
This theory and experiential course introduces health care concepts foundational to nursing practice. Students apply basic therapeutic nursing skills that support health in laboratory, simulation, and practice settings.
224
Foundational Concepts in Nursing Practice II

227
Nursing Therapeutics for Alterations in Health I
This theory and experiential course provides an integrated view of the pathology of injury and disease and pharmacological interventions for the nurse. Foundational concepts of pathophysiology and pharmacology are introduced.
285
The Discipline and Profession of Nursing I: Foundational Professional Concepts
The study of concepts foundational to the profession and discipline of nursing. Exploration of concepts of complexity, transition, social justice, ethic of caring, health promotion and principles of population health. Emphasis on understanding the social commitments and contributions made by nursing within its professional scope of practice. Includes an overview of the Canadian health-care system.
287
The Science of Health I: Communities and Populations

288
Supporting Health I: Communities and Populations

289
Integrating Nursing Roles & Practices I: Learning, Praxis and Scholarship in the Practicum Setting

301
Adult Health Theory
Focus on expanding the theoretical understanding of the adult experiencing complex acute and chronic illness.
302
Adult Health Practice
Managing care from a holistic and interdisciplinary perspective for more acutely and chronically ill patients with a primary focus on the adult in acute medical/surgical settings.
303
Psychiatric/Mental Health Theory
Exploration of concepts related to individuals and families experiencing mental health and illness.
305
Psychiatric/Mental Health Practice
Application of concepts, values, and skills with individuals, groups, and families experiencing mental health and illness.
307
Nursing of Families
Exploration of family nursing theory, models, and relational nursing practices which involve and support families within a variety of nursing practice contexts.
309
Nursing Research
Overview of research methodologies with emphasis on the critique of research and its use in nursing practice.
311
Pathophysiology
An overview of human pathophysiological concepts at the cellular, organ and systems level.
327
Nursing Therapeutics for Alterations in Health II

385
The Discipline and Profession of Nursing II: Inter-Professional Practice and Professional Accountability
Concepts of inter-professional practice and its core competencies are introduced. Examination of the contributions of nursing and nursing sensitive outcomes. Full scope nursing roles on intraprofessional and interprofessional teams are explored, in particular as pertains to the complex health-care needs of families in transition and at risk. Of primary focus is exploration of the scholarly and research foundations of the profession as the basis of the professional role of a Registered Nurse.
387
The Science of Health II: Families in Transition

388
Supporting Health II: Families in Transition

389
Integrating Nursing Roles and Practices II: Learning, Praxis and Scholarship in the Practicum Setting

401
Community Health Theory
Exploration of concepts related to the focus of the community as a client. Public health, populations at risk for physical and psychosocial disruptions in health, environmental health, cultural health patterns and beliefs, group dynamics and communications with groups.
402
Community Health Practice
Application of concepts, values, and skills with the community as the focus of care. Experiences are drawn from a variety of rural and urban settings.
403
Childbearing/Childrearing Families - Theory
Maternity and child health with family as context; the role of nursing pertinent to wellness patterns and alterations in health in these populations.
404
Childbearing/Childrearing Families - Practice
Facilitating and assisting childbearing and childrearing families to identify and respond to needs related to health promotion, health maintenance, and illness intervention in a variety of nursing practice settings.
405
Issues in Professional Practice
The nursing role related to the dynamics of the nursing profession and the health-care system; nursing and contemporary health issues.
406
Consolidation Practicum II
Consolidation experience which includes theory and practice opportunities, and prepares students for the final year and selected area of focus.
411
Nursing Scholarship
An inquiry-based approach to issues and trends in nursing scholarship.
421
Nursing of Families
Nursing of families in a variety of settings and clinical populations.
441
Health Assessment
Assessment of individuals in health and illness including health history and physical examination. Students will be expected to practice assessment skills in a clinical/laboratory setting.
461
Pathophysiology
Selected pathophysiological concepts and their relationship to human systems with an opportunity to explore an area of pathophysiology in depth.
485
The Discipline and Profession of Nursing III: Furthering Inquiry and Scholarship in Nursing

487
The Science of Health III: People Experiencing Life-Threatening Health Challenges

488
Supporting Health III: People with Life-Threatening Health Challenges

489
Integrating Nursing Roles and Practices III: Learning, Praxis and Scholarship in the Practicum Setting

495
The Discipline and Profession of Nursing IV: Understanding the Challenges of Leadership and Systems of Care

497
The Science of Health IV: People Experiencing Chronic Health Challenges

498
Supporting Health IV: People With Chronic Health Challenges

499
Integrating Nursing Roles and Practices IV: Learning, Praxis and Scholarship in the Practicum Setting
Integration and application of theoretic knowledge in simulated and nursing practice settings. Long-term nursing care of individuals, families and populations with chronic health challenges. Implementation of effective therapeutic relationships, complex assessments, reasoned clinical decision-making, client and family health education, client self-management and collaborative practice models.
501
Advanced Concepts in Nursing Practice
Leadership, management and change within the context of nursing and health care. Exploration of strategies for transition to the graduate role and responsibilities inherent in being a nursing professional.
502
Senior Clinical Practicum
Synthesis, application and further acquisition of knowledge, skills, and attitudes in a selected nursing practice setting. Emphasis on complexity of nursing care with clients (individuals, families and/or aggregates). Selection of focus area will be made through consultation with faculty.
503
Selected Topics in Nursing
Courses provide an in-depth exploration of nursing related to a clinical population and quality care topic.
517
Philosophy and Practice in Palliative Care
Examination of the philosophy of palliative/hospice care, taught by faculty from many disciplines. An important focus includes the students' self-exploration of their own beliefs, values, and attitudes about life, illness, death, and dying, and how this self-exploration shapes interactions with those we care for.
531
Community Health Nursing Theory
Concepts and models related to population-focused nursing with emphasis on community, health promotion, team building, assessment strategies, and planning approaches.
533
Community Health Nursing Clinical Practice
Application and synthesis of concepts and models related to population-focused nursing.
537
Nursing Leadership and Management
Professional and interpersonal relationships in nursing practice with an emphasis on leadership, interdisciplinary collaboration, and the management of nursing care at macro and micro levels.
539
Research in Nursing
Concepts and process necessary for critiquing research and application to nursing practice.
543
Senior Practicum
Synthesis and application of theoretical concepts within a selected area of practice with emphasis on further development of self-directed skills and professional attitudes.
585
The Discipline and Profession of Nursing V: Preparing for Professional Role Transition
This course focuses on the integration of senior students into the environment of professional nursing practice with an evidence-informed emphasis on the essentials of leadership, relational and practice ethics, effective inter and intra-professional collaboration, communication and conflict management for the purpose of facilitating a healthy transition to the role of a new graduate professional nurse within a contemporary health-care climate.
589
Integrating Nursing Roles and Practices V: Learning, Praxis and Scholarship in the Practicum Setting
This focused clinical experience, supported by two corequisite substantive nursing option theory courses, is aimed at refining critical thinking and competent use of theoretic frameworks and evidence to support clinical reasoning processes including: comprehensive assessment, holistic analysis and interpretation of client data, and competence and confidence in clinical decision-making. Students will choose a focused area of nursing practice.
599
Integrating Nursing Roles and Practices VI: Transition to Nursing Practice
Synthesis, application and further acquisition of knowledge, skills, and attitudes in a selected nursing practice setting. Emphasis on complexity of nursing care with clients (individuals, families, and/or aggregates). Selection of focus area will be made through consultation with faculty.
601
Seminar on Special Topics Related to Health Care and Nursing

602
Theoretical Perspectives in Aging
Overview of key theories of aging and explores contemporary and emerging issues associated with aging populations. Students will consider the provision of health and social services to older adults across different care continuums and explore their roles in the care of older adults at individual, community, and population levels.
603
Independent Supervised Clinical Practicum

604
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment
Philosophy and principles of a comprehensive geriatric assessment. The impact of age-related changes that contribute to older adults’ presentation and the responses to therapeutic management will be explored. Students will utilize this knowledge and explore how it relates to advanced practice.
605
Philosophical Knowledge and Advanced Nursing Practice
Exploration of the philosophical knowledge of advanced nursing practice. A process of critical analysis, reflection and inquiry into the various philosophical approaches, ways of knowing, theories concepts and paradigms leading to a philosophically informed analysis of the knowledge practices activated during the conduct of nursing work.
606
Focused Studies in Aging
Explores contemporary clinical issues of significance to an older adult population in detail. Students will select specific topics and may choose three modules from among the following: 1) Co-Morbidity and Chronicity; 2) Frailty and progressive changes in Functioning; 3) Cognitive Issues in Aging; 4) Palliation; and 5) Disability. Also covers principles of practice development and practice improvement using a quality improvement framework and development of a practice demonstration.
607
Independent Guided Study

608
Specialized Practice Demonstration
Integrates content knowledge with practice development or improvement processes, in order to enact a specialized workplace practice demonstration. Students will be supported by faculty to undertake their practice demonstration and to evaluate the effects of change on key stakeholders.
609
Applied Statistics for Nursing Research

611
Theoretical Knowledge and Advanced Nursing Practice
Introduction to substantive theory related to advanced nursing practice. As students identify their population focus they will examine frameworks for advanced nursing practice that inform their care for individuals, families and communities of practice.
612
Understand Comorbidity: Advanced Assessment, Screening, and Practice Implications
Selected theories and models of addiction and mental health relevant to advancing specialized practice and including advanced assessment, screening and implications for practice innovation and leadership.
614
Therapeutic Practices: Counselling, Treatment Planning, and Sustained Recovery
Selected therapeutic practices in addiction and mental health including but not limited to therapeutic relationships, therapeutic use of self, counseling (individual, group, family), motivational interviewing, cognitive behavioral therapy and contingency management and trauma informed care.
616
Specialized Practice Integration
Specialized practice seminar focused on integration of advanced knowledge, practice and ethics; active engagement in critical debriefing of complex case scenarios augmented with virtual simulation; and development of a practice demonstration proposal.
617
Philosophy and Practice in Palliative Care
Examination of the philosophy of palliative/hospice care, taught by faculty from many disciplines. An important focus includes the students' self-exploration of their own beliefs, values, and attitudes about life, illness, death, and dying, and how this self-exploration shapes interactions with those we care for.
618
Specialized Practice Demonstration
Implementation and evaluation of a proposed practice demonstration with a final report and recommendations.
621
Quantitative Designs and Analysis
Critical analysis of nursing research. Emphasis on the study of research designs appropriate to clinical nursing problems, measurement, reliability and validity issues, and critique criteria.
622
Foundational Philosophy for Teaching and Learning Across Contexts
Prepares students to teach in direct settings, simulation, online, as well as conventional classrooms. Focuses on building a philosophy for teaching and learning that incorporates foundational teaching and learning theory applicable to a variety of student contexts.
623
Hermeneutic Phenomenology
Inquiry into the philosophical and historical influences that have shaped hermeneutic phenomenology as an approach to nursing and health care research.  Exploration of interpretive practices essential to the conduct of hermeneutic research.
624
People, Places, and Relationships
Involves the critical examination of teaching and learning specific to advancing professional practice with emphasis on cultivating relationships for learning, learning across diversity. Also focuses on generation of possibilities for change and innovation and consolidation of preferred teaching and learning practices in a selected focus of study.
626
Integrative Seminars: Current Trends in Teaching and Learning
Introduces specialized topics in teaching and learning and provides an opportunity to engage in critical reflection and analysis. Students will explore a variety of teaching and learning strategies within multiple contexts and develop their individualized teaching practice.
627
Academic Scholarly Writing
An intensive two-day writing workshop with additional pre-course reading and writing. Students will prepare for the course by reading texts and writing scholarly accounts that may be based in their nursing practice.
628
Teaching and Learning Demonstration Project
Students will provide a demonstration of innovative teaching and learning strategies within a focused context (online, simulation, classroom, or clinical practice). Formulation and delivery of a proposed teaching and learning advanced practice demonstration will include a final report and recommendations.
629
Evidence-Informed Nursing
Building on foundations of critical inquiry by emphasizing the evaluation and interpretation of qualitative and quantitative research, students develop an enhanced ability to use systematic reviews and research-based innovations in making evidence-based decisions for client care, nursing knowledge and organizational or system improvement.
633
Leadership in Advanced Nursing Practice and Practicum I
A critical examination of theories and principles of leadership and leadership development as it relates to individual leadership practices, leading multidisciplinary teams, and leadership within the broader health system. Students will explore and discuss the influence of leaders and leadership on the health-care workplace, on client/population outcomes, and the health-care system. In the practicum project students will utilize evidence to assess their leadership skills and competencies, and how they relate to the development and evaluation of their practicum project.
634
Advanced Nursing Practice: Practicums II and III

642
Nurse Practitioner Practicum I and Role Integration
Building on the foundational knowledge of advanced pathophysiology, advanced health assessment and pharmacology, this course provides an opportunity for students to begin to acquire advanced knowledge and skills related to clinical diagnosis, decision-making and management of commonly presented acute and chronic health problems. Additionally this course will address issues related to nurse practitioner role integration.
644
Nurse Practitioner Practicum II
Diagnostic and management skills related to care of patients. Further development of skills in clinical history taking, physical assessment, and diagnostic testing.
646
Nurse Practitioner Practicum III
Learning opportunities and practice experience with emphasis on clinical diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, laboratory tests, differential diagnosis, and patient management.
650
Nurse Practitioner Practicum IV
Consolidation of components of NP role in specialty focus.
660
Cultivating Personal Leadership
Exploration of relational leadership including self-awareness and development of leadership capacity. Students will explore their personal leadership style and the influence of leadership on workplace cultures, team dynamics and quality of healthcare delivery.
661
Advanced Pathophysiology and Therapeutics
Study of pathophysiological phenomena and therapeutics at an advanced level. Classes will be a combination of didactic presentations, seminars and case studies. Students are invited to explore morbidity and mortality in the Canadian population in general and in their area of focus in particular.
662
The Future of Nursing: The Future of Health Systems
Examines the health delivery system focusing on accessibility, acceptability, appropriateness, effectiveness, efficiency and safety. Students will apply leadership principles to challenges inherent in a complex and dynamic health care system. Focuses on the role of nurses as leaders and transformers of health systems.
663
Pharmacotherapeutics in Advanced Nursing Practice
Principles of drug action, pharmacokinetics and pharmacotherapeutics in the context of advanced nursing practice. Opportunity to investigate pharmacotherapies specific to student's individual client populations.
664
Innovation in Health Systems
Focused exploration of the principles of innovation, and practices for leading innovation applied to complex healthcare environments. Students will apply design thinking, entrepreneurial practices and examine the value proposition and challenges of innovation in a health system context.
665
Advanced Health Assessment
Builds upon fundamental health assessment skills to provide a solid foundation for advanced assessment. Focuses on history taking physical examination, diagnostic reasoning and clinical judgment, as well as selected diagnostic skills necessary for advanced practice.
668
Specialized Practice Demonstration: Healthcare Grand Challenge
Formulation of a bold and innovative proposal developed through team collaboration and joint leadership that addresses a systemic problem and aims to improve the quality of healthcare in Alberta. Drawing on previous learning of personal and professional competencies, students will be presented with a grand challenge associated with leading and improving a complex health system.
683
Qualitative Designs and Analysis
Exploration of research methods based primarily on inductive reasoning. Methods, issues and techniques of sampling, data collection, analysis, and interpretation will be explored. Experience will be provided in data collection, management, and analysis.
701
Doctoral Special Topics

705
Philosophy of Science in Nursing
Exploration of major philosophical positions and their contributions to the generation and evaluation of knowledge. Examination of the development and evolution of nursing knowledge.
707
Directed Study

711
Doctoral Scholarship in Nursing
Focus on development of a nurse scientist. Seminar discussions will address launching a viable and fundable program of research, grantsmanship, managing multi-disciplinary research teams, and establishing a record of publication and dissemination.
721
Advanced Quantitative Research Methods
Opportunities for developing nurse scientists and other health professional doctoral students to increase understanding of, and ability to utilize, quantitative research methods for scientific inquiry. Focuses on identifying issues/dilemmas arising during the research process and methods to address these challenges.
723
Hermeneutic Phenomenology

733
Doctoral Thesis Seminar
Opportunity for students to discuss development of their thesis proposal with a focus on the question, design, ethical considerations, and funding.
769
Contemporary Issues in Health Care
Theoretical examination of concepts and research for increasing the availability and accessibility of health care. Appraisal of the relationships among leadership, policy and practice issues from a multidisciplinary perspective.
783
Advanced Qualitative Research Methods
Exploration of the philosophical foundations and practice of qualitative research methods in health care inquiry. Emphasis on interpretive assumptions and practices relevant to the conduct of qualitative research.
Operations Management
20
301
Introduction to Operations and Supply Chain Management
A survey of the decision processes in production and operations management and their relationship to other business functions. Topics include project planning and scheduling, inventory management, quality management, capacity planning, facilities layout, and supply chain management.
317
Fundamentals of Operations and Supply Chain Management
An introduction to operations and supply chain management's strategic importance, wide applicability, and sustainability integration. Topics include management of inventory, quality, global supply chains, capacity, projects and process improvement.
401
Production Planning and Control
An in-depth treatment of inventory and production within an organization. Topics covered include inventory control, sales and operations planning, materials requirements planning, and lean processes. Recent advances in manufacturing may also be discussed.
403
Managing Quality in Products and Services
An in-depth treatment of quality management practices and techniques for products and services. Topics and techniques covered include designing and assuring quality, quality issues in the supply chain, statistical quality measurement, and continuous process and quality improvement.
405
Service Operations Management
The management of service businesses from both a qualitative and quantitative perspective. Topics may include service design and performance measurement, service quality and recovery, managing people in service industries, service demand forecasting, scheduling, managing lineups, yield management, network optimization, and the role of information technology. Industry examples include travel and hospitality, professional services, retail, communication and transportation and banking.
407
Project Management
The management of projects in a variety of settings such as software development and installation, disaster relief, new product development, advertising campaigns and financial auditing are examined. Material from the organizational, planning, technical, financial, informational, and logistical aspects of project management will emphasize the interdisciplinary nature of projects. Use of commercial computer software for planning and scheduling projects is learned.
409
Computer Simulation for Business
Companies encounter numerous problems that are characterized by uncertainties for which they need to find a solution. Simulation provides a means for imitating the behaviour of real-life situations in a computer environment, allowing for "what-if" analyses of different scenarios. Hands-on experience in creating simulation models and obtaining reliable results for decision making with the use of different simulation techniques is gained.
411
Field Investigation in Operations and Supply Chain Management
Project-based experiential learning on operational improvements within an organization in operations or supply chain management. Students work in teams on a single project. Oral and written presentation skills are developed.
415
Prescriptive Models in Business Analytics
Identification of data requirements for analytical decision-making. Case studies used throughout to develop insight for decision making while dealing with incomplete and ambiguous data. Introduction to VBA-enabled spreadsheet modelling to design and implement optimization models without/with uncertainty as well as advanced Monte Carlo simulation.
419
Predictive Models in Business Analytics
Decision making with big data and predictive analytics methods. Students learn to describe and visualize business data, as well as to make predictions and classifications with data. Methods include regression models, regression trees, association rules and cluster analysis.
559
Selected Topics in Operations Management
Investigation of selected topics in Operations Management.
601
Operations Management
Management of the production and/or service delivery system of the organization in concert with marketing, human resources, finance, and information systems. Management decision making on a continuum from day-to-day operating decisions such as quality control to long-term strategic decisions such as capacity planning. Topics covered in the course may include operations strategy, project management and inventory and supply chain management.
672
Operations and Supply Chain Integration
Technology infrastructure, collaborations in business-to-business relationships, and customization in business to client relationships.
715
Management Science Using Spreadsheets
The modelling and analysis of quantitative problems from a variety of fields within business, with emphasis on insight for decision making. Use of optimization, simulation, decision analysis, and other techniques in spreadsheets. Spreadsheet engineering as an approach to reducing spreadsheet errors. Case studies are used to develop skill in dealing with incomplete and ambiguous information.
719
Project Procurement and Logistics
Project procurement and logistics management in engineering, construction management and manufacturing, both nationally and internationally. Topics include fundamentals of procurement management, preparation of request for proposals, the selection of bidders, the evaluation of bids, supplier selection, contract management, control of inventory, handling of material flow and management of warehousing, logistics strategy and global issues.
731
Decision-Making for Outcome Optimization
Evaluates the use of decision tools for analysis and synthesis to optimize decision-making in different types of businesses. Tools explored include mathematical programming, computer simulation, decision analysis, forecasting and queuing theory. Theoretical treatment is considered, as well as practical model application to support managerial decision-making.
743
Simulation of Operational Systems

745
Operations Planning and Supply Chain Management
Case studies of real-world situations calling for appropriate state-of-the-art models and solution methods for the design, planning, control and improvement of supply chain operations. The main concepts and terminology in the domain of supply chain management are explored and then applied to a given situation.
797
Advanced Seminar in Operations Management

799
Doctoral Seminars in Operations Management

Organizational Behaviour and Human Resources
31
317
Organizational Behaviour

321
Foundations in Organizational Behaviour and Human Resources
Energies, skills and abilities of people to meet the challenge of today's organizations; diagnostic skills to recognize and analyze organizational problems; the linkage between effective management of people and goal accomplishment for organizations; current challenges in organizational forms, diverse environments and cultures; foundation for further study of Organizational Behaviour and Human Resources concepts.
401
Strategic Human Resource Management
Provides the conceptual basis and skills to make strategic human resource decisions. Learning to think strategically about human resource management practices and policies such as reward systems, performance management, and hiring.
405
Labour Relations
Examination of the nature and role of labour relations in the resolution of issues affecting employers, employees and the public interest.
407
Rationality and Decisions
An overview of key concepts in the decision sciences including normative, descriptive and prescriptive models of judgment and choice. This course emphasizes real-world applications of different decision making and decision support models.
409
Talent Management
Examines how organizations can proactively manage their talent pool, from the recruitment phase through to screening, assessing, interviewing, and selecting top talent using scientifically valid and legally defensible practices.
411
Training and Development
Examines how to enhance job-relevant knowledge and skills to improve job performance. Topics include needs assessment, learning and transfer of training, training methods and evaluation.
413
Compensation and Performance Management
Systematically design compensation systems that improve employee engagement and performance. Topics include job analysis and evaluation, pay systems, and benefits.
421
Interpersonal Behaviour
Focus on increasing self-awareness, self-understanding and presentation of self. Interpersonal skills development necessary for group effectiveness and team management provide basis for performance leadership. Format involves learning in small groups.
449
Arbitration of Employment Disputes
Workplace dispute resolution using arbitration. Topics include discipline, drug testing, surveillance, dress codes, discrimination, absenteeism, employment contracts. Emphasis on legal principles in employment arbitration, data base research, and advocacy skills using simulations, case law and guest speakers.
491
Lifework Planning and Career Assessment
Persons demonstrate competency in personal and career development by their ability to take personal responsibility for the quality of their lives. Assess skills and values and plan for personal and career development after graduation.
493
Business Negotiations
The major concepts and theories of bargaining and negotiation; the dynamics of interpersonal and intergroup conflict; analysis of bargaining and conflict relationships and exploration of individual bargaining styles. Application to a variety of negotiation situations. Use of simulations and written assignments.
559
Selected Topics in Management and Organizations
Examination of selected topics in management and organizations.
601
Organizational Behaviour
Evidence-based approach to leadership and organizational behaviour. Begins with self-assessment and then uses experiential learning to develop leadership techniques, including: motivation, team processes, negotiation, and decision-making.
631
Managing Human Resources from a Strategic Perspective
Integrated coverage of human resource management theory, practice and research as it applies to the strategic management of organizations.
672
Working with People
Focuses on employment in different organizational contexts (e.g. established and start-up organizations, public and privately owned, or government and not-for-profit).
674
Navigating the Organization
Development of negotiation, power and influence, politics, and conflict resolution skills leading to increased effectiveness with internal and external stakeholders.
691
Project Team Building and Interpersonal Skills
Leadership style and behaviour; interpersonal effectiveness and self-awareness; project teams; group dynamics; organizational change; application to the project environment.
721
Advanced Leadership
Examines leadership theories relevant to advanced leadership (e.g., ethical leadership, humble leadership, charismatic leadership). Delves into concepts that leaders must consider when making decisions and implementing strategy (e.g., power, influence, change-management).
723
Organizational Change and Development
Diagnosing organizational situations where the need for change exists and facilitating such changes. Utilization of behavioural science knowledge for organizational problem-solving.
725
Organizational Analysis and Design

727
Competitive Advantage Through People
Analysis of the interdependencies and theoretical foundations of staffing and development programs, design and administration of reward compensation systems and performance management programs from the orientation of professional human resources management.
729
Workplace Issues
Examination of the employment relationship, with a focus on controversial and significant topics in the workplace. Coverage may include: unjust dismissal; drug and alcohol testing; computer and Internet policies; privacy and surveillance; impact of unions; disability and accommodation; and workplace violence. Modular format with modules customized to meet student interests.
731
Lifework Planning and Career Assessment
Persons demonstrate competency in personal and career development by their ability to take personal responsibility for the quality of their lives. Students will clarify their competencies and values and plan for dealing with the challenges faced by mature adults.
733
Leadership for Change
Focuses on understanding and developing the skills required to lead and sustain the process of change in oneself and others and being able to mobilize and harness the energy of multiple stakeholders in a constantly changing environment, moving the collective in a positive direction.
741
Managerial Decision Making
Examines how decisions are made in organizations and how these decisions can be made more effectively, particularly at the top management and Board levels. Decision making in current business contexts are explored by way of simulations, case analyses, discussions, debates and written assignments.
745
Cross-Cultural Leadership and Human Resources Management
Leadership of human resources in a cross-cultural and international context; the nature of cultural differences; influence on organizational processes and practices such as communication, leadership, decision-making, team dynamics, staffing, performance management and organizational design, and implications for those holding international managerial roles.
789
Seminar in the Management of Human Resources
Intensive study and discussion of current literature, research and issues with respect to selected topics in the management of human resources.
793
Business Negotiations
The major concepts and theories of negotiation; the dynamics of interpersonal and intergroup conflict; analysis of negotiation strategies and individuals styles. Application to a broad range of business negotiations. Use of simulations and written assignments.
797
Advanced Seminar in Organizational Behaviour and Human Resources

799
Doctoral Seminars in Organizational Behaviour and Human Resources

Petroleum Engineering
29
313
Introduction to Flow in Porous Media
Fluid flow in porous media: pore structure; porosity and absolute permeability capillarity; Darcy's Law and single phase flow; immiscible and miscible fluid flow; wettability; multiphase flow and relative permeability; pore level analysis of two-phase displacement; and integration of these properties with geological information; application of fundamental principles to hydrocarbon recovery from petroleum reservoirs.
423
Oil and Gas Engineering Process Development
Design of oil and gas processing units and plants; cost estimates and oil and gas process economics; optimization techniques; introduction to linear programming; safety and environmental considerations in process design.
429
Reservoir Engineering
Review of petroleum fluid properties and flow in porous media; reserve estimation using volumetric and material balance methods in gas, gas-condensate and oil reservoirs; discussion of reservoir drive mechanisms; aquifer models; decline analysis; routine and special core analysis; PVT data and equation of state modelling; single phase flow in reservoirs; introduction to well testing; introduction to reservoir modelling; introduction to reservoir recovery processes.
505
Surface Production Operations
Oil and gas treating process equipment, design and operation. Two-phase and three-phase separators; heater treaters. Fluid gathering and distribution systems. Pumps and compressors. Flow measurement and production testing. Natural gas dehydration and sweetening. Produced water treatment and disposal.
507
Well Logging and Formation Evaluation
Fundamentals of wireline well logging and the log interpretation techniques for oil and gas wells. Basic reservoir petrophysical parameters. Types of well logging devices; physics of operation and response characteristics of various well logging tools. Application of well logs for integrated petroleum reservoir management.
509
Well Testing
Basic theory and current techniques for well testing. Drawdown and build up tests; diffusivity equation and various boundary conditions and flow regimes; superposition; single-rate and multi-rate testing; effect of boundaries; derivative analysis; fractured wells, fractured reservoirs and other flow models; wellbore dynamics; type curve matching; advanced decline curve analysis. Computer aided analysis and hands on experience in the computer laboratory.
511
Design for Oil and Gas Engineering I
Team design project applying principles of project engineering and management to the recovery and processing of hydrocarbons. Petroleum design considerations will include; detailed reservoir characterization; well test analysis; recovery and production forecasting; preliminary drilling, completions and facilities design, and economic evaluation.
513
Flow in Porous Media
Fundamentals of fluid flow in porous media: pore structure; porosity and absolute permeability capillarity; Darcy's Law and single phase flow; immiscible and miscible fluid flow; wettability; multiphase flow and relative permeability. Concepts applied to hydrocarbon reservoirs and fluid migration in soils including; characterization of pore space, pore level modelling of porous media, routine and advanced core analysis. Similarities and differences between hydrocarbon reservoirs and soils.
515
Drilling and Well Completions
An introduction to drilling; overview of petroleum engineering geology; basic rock properties. Fluid flow in porous media. Drilling rig types, components and selection; overview of drilling operations; drilling fluids and mud systems; drilling hydraulics; casing design and casing seat selections; cementing; formation damage, well completions. Special topics including: directional drilling; blowout control; logging and coring; hole stability; planning and cost control; underbalanced drilling; coiled tubing drilling; offshore operations, environmental aspects.
519
Special Topics
Current advanced topics in Petroleum Engineering.
521
Introduction to Drilling Engineering
Introduction to the physics of flow in porous media; overview of drilling operations; equipment; relevant processes and procedures; basic completion operation; environmental aspect of drilling and completion operations.
523
Introduction to Reservoir Engineering
Basic concepts of fluid flow in porous media; important reservoir rock and fluid properties affecting productivity; reserve estimation using volumetric and material balance methods in gas, gas-condensate and oil reservoirs; discussion of different reservoir drive mechanisms; aquifer models; decline analysis; Darcy's Law and single phase flow through porous media. Introduction to well testing, solution of radial diffusivity equation corresponding to infinite-acting and pseudo-steady state flow of slightly compressible fluids and real gases.
525
Waterflooding and Enhanced Oil Recovery
Review of rock-fluid properties; trapping and mobilization of residual oil; displacement theory; linear waterflood calculations; viscous fingering; flood patterns and sweep efficiency considerations; characterization of reservoir heterogeneity; analytical waterflood prediction models; black-oil reservoir simulation models; design engineering aspects of waterflooding; and overview of enhanced recovery methods.
531
Design for Oil and Gas Engineering II

533
Petroleum Production Engineering
Principles of oil and gas production mechanics. Analysis of fluid flow from the formation to the surface facility. Reservoir inflow performance. Wellbore hydraulics and multiphase flow. Nodal analysis for production optimization Acidizing and hydraulic fracturing. Water and gas coning. Diagnosis of production problems. Artificial lift; Sucker pumping; electrical submersible pumps; progressing cavity pumps; gas lift.
543
Geological Characterization of Oil and Gas Reservoirs

551
Petroleum Engineering Laboratory
Experiments on Fluid Flow in Oil & Gas production. Measurements of porous rock and fluid properties, such as relative permeability, fluid dispersion, fluid phase behaviour and viscosity, unstable fluid displacement.
555
Oil and Gas Field Safety and Equipment

561
Fuel Science and Technology
Classification of fuels. Origin, geology, production and processing of fossil fuels. Supply, consumption and demand for fuels - historical patterns and future trends. Thermodynamics and reaction kinetics of combustion. Physical and chemical properties and influence on fuel utilization. Ecological, efficiency, safety, economic considerations. Non-conventional fuels. Transportation and handling.
563
Corrosion in Engineering Applications
Electrochemical principle of corrosion reactions. Corrosion thermodynamics and kinetics. Electrochemical corrosion measurement techniques. Passivity and pitting corrosion. Crevice corrosion and galvanic corrosion. Environmentally assisted cracking. Corrosion control techniques including cathodic protection, coatings and inhibitors. Material selection for corrosion resistance.
571
Unconventional Oil Production
Description and analysis of heavy oil geology and heavy oil recovery technologies. Discussion of heavy oil production mechanisms and methods, recovery process design, transportation, facilities, marketing, economics, and environmental issues.
573
Tight Oil and Unconventional Gas Exploitation
Overview of tight oil and unconventional gas resources (tight gas, shale gas, tight oil, shale oil, coal bed methane, and natural gas hydrates) in a ‘Total Petroleum System’. Geological aspects, drilling, completion and stimulation methods; reservoir characterization by petrophysics and well test analysis; forecasting methods; environmental and regulatory issues; economics and cost drivers.
621
Applied Reservoir Engineering
Basic reservoir engineering principles including fluid flow in porous media, rock and fluid properties; estimation of recovery under different operating conditions.
622
Subsurface Production Operations
Analysis of fluid flow from the formation to the surface including inflow performance, wellbore hydraulics, multiphase flows and well stimulation techniques.
623
Reservoir Analysis and Description
Data analysis and integration for reservoir modelling and simulation.
624
Enhanced Oil Recovery
Introduction to water and polymer flooding, miscible displacements and surfactant flooding with focus on case studies.
625
Natural Gas Engineering
Basic principles of natural gas production and processing including properties of natural gases, vapour-liquid equilibrium and separation techniques.
626
Economic Analysis of Petroleum Systems
Basic principles of analyzing the profitability and risk of petroleum projects including project selection, investment ranking, budgeting and portfolio development.
627
Drilling Engineering
Overview of modern drilling technologies and techniques including drilling hydraulics, directional drilling, drilling fluid properties and selection, well control and completion methods.
Philosophy
90
201
Mind, Matter and God
An introduction to philosophy through discussion of selected topics such as skepticism, perception, personal identity, free will and determinism, God.
249
Morality, Virtue and Society
An introduction to philosophy through discussion of morality, virtue and the role of morality in society.
259
Sex, Love and Death
Topics to be addressed may include the nature of sex, love, and death, the relation between sex and love, sexual ethics, sexual perversion, sexual harassment and pornography, abortion, suicide, euthanasia and the value of life.
264
How Do We Know?
An investigation of belief, knowledge, and error in everyday life and the sciences, including discussion of the nature of knowledge; patterns of valid reasoning and sources of error; the influence of bias on belief and knowledge; scientific reasoning and theory building; the distinction between science and pseudo-science.
279
Logic I
Sentential and first-order logic from both deductive and semantic points of view. Some elementary metatheorems.
301
The Classical Period
The study of a selection of philosophers from the Pre-Socratics, through Plato and Aristotle, to the Hellenistic and Roman philosophers.
303
The Medieval and Renaissance Period
The study of a selection of philosophers from Augustine to Montaigne, such as Boethius, Abelard, Ibn Rushd, Maimonides, Aquinas, Ockham, and Erasmus.
305
The Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries
The study of a selection of philosophers from Descartes to Kant.
307
Nineteenth- or Twentieth-Century Analytic Philosophy
A study of some major analytic philosophers, such as Frege, Russell, Moore, Wittgenstein, Carnap, Marcus, Kripke, and/or Quine.
309
Hegel to Nietzsche
A study of nineteenth-century European philosophers, such as  Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, Feuerbach, Marx, Kierkegaard, Schopenhauer and/or Nietzsche.
311
Twentieth-Century Continental Philosophy
A study of twentieth-century Continental philosophers such as Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, Adorno, Marcuse, Habermas, Foucault, Derrida, Kristeva and/or Irigaray.
313
Bioethics
A critical and analytical examination of ethical and legal problems arising in and about health care. May include euthanasia, abortion, the conditions for the withdrawal of treatment, the physician-patient relationship, research on human subjects, genetic engineering. The practical applications of ethical and legal theory are emphasized.
314
Information Technology Ethics
A critical and analytical examination of ethical and legal problems arising in and about information technology. May include hacking, online privacy, intellectual property rights, artificial intelligence, globalization and regulation issues, cheating in online games, and others.
315
Philosophy in Literature
Introduction to various philosophical problems, theories and points of view as found in works of literature from classical times to the present. Authors may include Homer to Orwell and Huxley.
317
Philosophy and Film
Introduction to various philosophical problems, theories and points of view as found in works of film.
325
Law and Morality
An introduction to legal and political philosophy including the relation between law and morality, the nature of legal authority and political and social theory.
329
Business Ethics
A critical and analytical examination of some central moral problems that arise in and for business with emphasis on the details of the particular problems studied and the conceptual and other tools needed to understand and resolve or solve such problems. May include the moral responsibilities and rights of corporations and their officers, codes of business ethics, and conflicts of responsibilities and rights.
330
Philosophy of Money
An examination of the historical and contemporary philosophical issues surrounding money, such as metaphysics of value, the justice of wealth distribution, and the ethics of wealth and charity.
331
Philosophy of Religion
A philosophical examination of the fundamental concepts of religious thinking.
333
Aesthetics
An examination of the criteria and concepts employed in aesthetic evaluation.
335
Asian Philosophy
Considers traditional philosophical topics such as metaphysics, epistemology, logic, ethics, aesthetics, political philosophy, and environmental philosophy as they are dealt with in Asian traditions or texts, as well as topics that are more specific to Asian traditions, such as actionless action, sagehood, karma, rebirth, enlightenment/liberation, egoism, and attachment.
337
Philosophy, Feminism and Gender
Study of social and political issues arising from philosophical considerations of gender including the intersection of gender and race with attention to feminist analyses of gender. May include feminist methodology as well as gender issues in such areas as knowledge and science, language, ethics and political theory.
345
Issues in Environmental Ethics
A philosophical examination of how humans conduct themselves in relation to other living species and the natural environment. May include: obligations to future generations; animal liberation theories; population policy; pollution; the value of species diversity and species preservation; biocentric and holistic ethical theories of environment; ethical dimension of environmental policy formation.
347
Contemporary Moral Problems
A critical and analytical examination of current moral issues, such as authority, religion in society, suicide, sexual morality, abortion, the legal enforcement of morality, justice.
359
Existentialism
An investigation of existentialist treatments of agency, religion, subjecthood, death, and despair. May include Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Dostoevsky, Camus, Kafka, Sartre, and de Beauvoir.
361
Evidence
An investigation of philosophical perspectives on evidence, such as the nature of evidence, whether and how much evidence is required for reasonable belief and action, what sort of evidence might be required for moral, scientific, religious, or mathematical belief, and the role of evidence in medical, legal, political, and social contexts.
367
Science and Philosophy
Examination of the fundamental principles of scientific enquiry, such as scientific explanation, theory, prediction and confirmation.
377
Elementary Formal Logic
Sentential and first-order logic, with identity and descriptions, from both deductive and semantic points of view. Completeness, compactness, decidability for sentential logic.
379
Logic II

383
Philosophy and Psychology
A study of topics such as: thought, emotions, action and the will, mind-body identity, personal identity, and theories about the nature of mind.
395
Mind and World
An intensive study of selected topics in philosophy of mind, metaphysics and epistemology. Intended for philosophy majors, including students in the history and philosophy of science program.
397
Value Theory
An intensive study of selected topics in value theory.
399
Topics in Philosophy
A detailed examination of a topic or tradition in European or Anglo-American philosophy.
401
A Classical Philosopher
A study of the writings of a philosopher from the classical period.
403
A Medieval or Renaissance Philosopher
A study of the writings of a philosopher from the medieval or renaissance period.
405
A Seventeenth- or Eighteenth-Century Philosopher
A study of the writings of a seventeenth- or eighteenth-century philosopher.
407
A Nineteenth- or Twentieth-Century Philosopher
A study of the writings of a nineteenth- or twentieth-century philosopher.
408
A Philosopher in the Continental Tradition - Nineteenth Century to Present
A study of the writings of a philosopher from the European tradition, emphasizing the influences of and on other philosophers and movements within the tradition.
411
Topics in the History of Philosophy
An investigation of a historical theme or movement in philosophy.
412
Contemporary Continental Philosophy
An investigation of contemporary themes or movements in Continental philosophy.
423
Metaphysics
An examination of some central topics in metaphysics.
425
Philosophy of Law
An investigation of philosophical accounts of the nature of law and legal systems including central positions in jurisprudence, such as natural law, legal realism and legal positivism; and relations between law and morality.
449
Contemporary Meta-Ethics
A study of recent theories about the meaning of moral terms, the nature of moral reasoning, and the relations between facts and values. May include naturalism, intuitionism, emotivism, prescriptivism, and nihilism.
451
Contemporary Ethical Theories
A detailed investigation of some central normative ethical theories, including utilitarian, contractarian, and deontological theories.
453
Social and Political Philosophy
A study of fundamental issues in social and political thought, such as rights, justice, authority, equality, freedom, democracy, property, liberalism, communitarianism, socialism, and Marxism.
461
Epistemology
An examination of some central topics in the theory of knowledge.
467
Problems in the Philosophy of Science
An examination of the central methodological and foundational issues arising in the sciences.
471
Philosophy of Language
An examination of some central topics in the philosophy of language.
473
Philosophy of Logic
An examination of some central topics in the philosophy of logic.
479
Logic III
Advanced metatheory for logical systems. Gödel's incompleteness theorems, models of arithmetic, and definability.
483
Philosophy of Mind
An examination of some central topics in the philosophy of mind.
499
Topics in Philosophy
An intensive study of a selected topic in Philosophy.
501
Advanced Topics in Ancient  or Medieval Philosophy
An investigation into central issues in ancient or medieval philosophy.
505
Advanced Topics in Modern Philosophy
An investigation of central issues in modern philosophy.
507
Advanced Topics in Nineteenth- or Twentieth-Century Philosophy
An investigation of central issues in nineteenth- and twentieth-century philosophy.
517
Advanced Topics in the History and Philosophy of Science
An intensive investigation of one or more issues in the history and philosophy of science.
519
Formal Semantics of Natural Language
Central issues in the logical semantics of natural language, focusing on topics such as quantification, scope, and the interpretation of pronouns.
523
Advanced Topics in Metaphysics
An investigation of one or more issues in metaphysics.
525
Advanced Topics in Philosophy of Law
An intensive investigation of one or more issues in the philosophy of law.
527
Advanced Topics in the Philosophy of Religion
An investigation of one or more issues in the philosophy of religion.
547
Advanced Topics in Applied Ethics
An intensive investigation of one or more issues in applied ethics.
549
Advanced Topics in Ethics
An intensive investigation of one or more issues in normative ethical theory or meta-ethics.
553
Advanced Topics in Political Philosophy
An intensive investigation of one or more issues in political philosophy.
561
Advanced Topics in Epistemology
An investigation of one or more issues in epistemology
565
Philosophical Topics in the Sciences
A study of philosophical issues arising in a particular area of science, such as philosophy of biology, philosophy of social sciences, and philosophy of physics.
567
Advanced Topics in Philosophy of Science
An intensive study of one or more issues in the philosophy of science.
571
Advanced Topics in Philosophy of Logic and Philosophy of Language
An intensive study of one or more issues in the philosophy of logic or language
579
Advanced Topics in Logic
An investigation of one or more issues in logic.
583
Advanced Topics in Philosophy of Mind
An investigation of one or more issues in philosophy of mind
590
Honours Thesis
A year-long development of the honours thesis, under close supervision of a faculty member.
595
Directed Reading
Directed reading for students in their third or fourth years.
597
Honours Seminar

599
Advanced Topics in Philosophy
An in-depth investigation into a selected topic in Philosophy.
601
Seminar in Selected Problems

603
Graduate Proseminar

609
Topics in the History of Philosophy

623
Topics in Metaphysics

627
Topics in the Philosophy of Religion

649
Topics in Ethics

653
Topics in Social and Political Philosophy

661
Topics in Epistemology

667
Topics in Philosophy of Science

671
Topics in Philosophical Logic and the Philosophy of Language

677
Metalogic
Introduction to the metatheory of logical systems. Completeness, compactness, Loewenheim-Skolem, and undecidability theorems for first-order logic. Preview of non-standard models, second-order logic, and Godel's first incompleteness theorem.
679
Topics in Logic

683
Topics in the Philosophy of Mind

691
Topics in Philosophical Analysis

695
Graduate Directed Reading

699
Master's Research and Professional Development
Students develop relevant skills for a successful academic or non-academic career. Topics include research and thesis writing strategies, presentation skills, preparing writing samples and articles for publication, teaching development including teaching portfolios, research statements, and CVs.
700
Doctoral Research and Professional Development
Students develop relevant skills for a successful academic or non-academic career. Topics include research and thesis writing strategies, presentation skills, preparing writing samples and articles for publication, teaching development including teaching portfolios, research statements, and CVs.
Physical Education
3
321
Games I
Games and sports suited to the needs of children and youth in schools.
333
Gymnastics and Track and Field
Dominant movement patterns in gymnastic activities and the run-jump-throw skills of track and field.
349
Activities in Alternative Environments
Fundamental principles of creating an effective learning environment in the school Physical Education Alternative Environments setting (K to Grade 12).
Physics
59
106
Module M6 Thermal Physics
Thermal Physics. Gas laws; kinetic theory of gases; temperature; internal energy; specific heat; energy transfer; laws of thermodynamics; PVT diagrams.
211
Mechanics
Introductory Newtonian particle mechanics and rigid bodies in rotational equilibrium: Kinematics, Newton's laws, conservation of momentum and mechanical energy.
221
Mechanics
Introductory Newtonian particle mechanics and rigid bodies in rotational equilibrium: Kinematics, Newton's laws, conservation of momentum and mechanical energy.
223
Introductory Electromagnetism, and Thermal Physics
Electrical forces and energy. Static electric fields due to point charges. Parallel-plate capacitor. Simple DC circuits. Lorentz force. Static magnetic fields generated by electric currents. Electromagnetic induction. Gas Laws; kinetic theory of gases; temperature, thermal energy, specific heat; energy transfer; laws of thermodynamics; PVT diagrams.
227
Classical Physics
Vector algebra; statics and kinematics of rigid bodies; Newton’s laws of motion; conservation laws; collisions; rotational mechanics; computer modelling of physical systems; approximation methods.
229
Modern Physics
Origins of quantum mechanics. Wave mechanics and applications. Nuclear physics and radioactivity. Special Theory of Relativity.
259
Electricity and Magnetism (for students in Engineering)
Electric and magnetic fields related to charges and current through Maxwell’s equations. Energy stored in fields, potential energy, and voltage. Conductors, insulators, and dielectrics. Resistance, capacitance, and inductance with applications to RC/RL circuits.
271
How Things Work
Physics behind many common devices will be discussed. Topics will be chosen from among the following: the use of simple and compound machines; waves, sound, acoustics; light and optics; household electric circuitry; magnetism.
303
Quantum Mysteries and Paradoxes
Aims to explain basic quantum phenomena for students outside the physical sciences. Topics covered may include wave-particle duality, quantum interference, as well as the paradoxes of entanglement and quantum nonlocality. Applications such as quantum cryptography and quantum teleportation are discussed, as are the philosophical interpretations of the quantum picture of the world.
321
Harmonic Motion, Waves, and Rotation
Simple harmonic oscillations. Progressive waves in one dimension. Energy of a wave. Superposition. Standing waves. Newtonian mechanics of rigid body rotation.
323
Optics and Electromagnetism
Static electric fields due to charge distributions. Static magnetic fields due to current distributions. Time-dependent behaviour of capacitors and inductances. Geometrical optics: Thin lenses and curved mirrors. Physical optics: Interference and diffraction.
341
Classical Mechanics I
Conservative and non-conservative forces; forced and damped harmonic oscillations; phase-space analysis; central force motion and scattering; non-inertial frames; applications of ordinary differential equations.
343
Classical Mechanics II
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics; general rotations of rigid bodies; moment of inertia tensor; eigenvalues and eigenvectors; perturbation theory; applications to multiple-particle systems.
355
Electromagnetic Theory I
Electrostatics, DC circuits, calculation of magnetic intensity from currents, motion of charged particles in electric and magnetic fields, electromagnetic induction, transient effects in capacitors and inductors, electric and magnetic properties of materials.
365
Acoustics, Optics and Modern Physics (for students in Engineering)
Wave motion as applied to acoustics and physical optics. Wave-particle duality applied to light and matter; electron energy levels of atoms and crystals.
369
Acoustics, Optics and Radiation (for students in Engineering)
Wave motion as applied to acoustics, geometric and physical optics, and radiant energy transfer. Traditional and modern applications.
371
Introduction to Energy
Energy and power will be discussed. Sources of energy such as wind power, solar power, nuclear power, geothermal energy and fossil fuels and related limitations will be considered. Generation and distribution of electricity will be discussed.
375
Introduction to Optics and Waves
Geometrical Optics: lenses, mirrors, and other basic optical components. Wave motion. Description of light as a wave. Fermat’s principle. Refraction, scattering, interference, diffraction, and polarization. Optical instruments (including telescopes and microscopes). Lasers and fibre optics if time allows.
381
Computational Physics I
Working with floating point numbers, root finding, multivariate numerical integration, numerical solutions of coupled ordinary differential equations, least-squares fitting linear and non-linear models.
397
Applied Physics Laboratory I
Basic laboratory electronics, vacuum systems, and optical devices. Introduction to experimental control, data collection, and analysis. Fundamentals of error analysis and error propagation.
435
Mathematical Methods in Physics
Partial differential equations. Fourier analysis. Laplace Transforms. Special functions and orthogonal polynomials. Complex analysis. Applications in Physics and Astronomy
443
Quantum Mechanics I
Basic concepts of quantum systems and their physical interpretation. Operator, matrix, and wave mechanics. Dirac notation. Schrödinger’s time-independent and time-dependent equations. Applications.
449
Statistical Mechanics I
State-counting; classical distributions and probability theory; origins and role of entropy; equilibrium; ensemble theory; concepts of work, heat, and temperature; equations of state; heat capacity; equipartition theorem; engines; laws of thermodynamics; non-equilibrium systems; Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution; thermodynamic potentials.
451
Statistical Mechanics II
Quantum statistical mechanics; bosons and fermions; quantum counting; classical-quantum transition; blackbody radiation; applications of statistical mechanics to phase transitions, critical phenomena and complex systems, Ising model, mean-field theory.
455
Electromagnetic Theory II
Macroscopic Maxwell equations. Scalar and vector potentials. Electrostatics and magnetostatics. Dielectric and magnetic properties of materials. Superconductors.
457
Electromagnetic Theory III
Electromagnetic wave solutions to Maxwell's equations, in vacuum and in insulating and conducting media. Waveguides. Electromagnetic radiation from accelerated charges. Relativistic formulation of electrodynamics.
481
Computational Physics II
Random walks, cellular automata, pseudo-random number generation, Monte Carlo methods, numerical solution of ordinary and partial differential equations, introduction to Fourier transforms.
497
Applied Physics Laboratory II
Intermediate laboratory electronics. AC circuit theory and semiconductor devices, including operational amplifiers. Digital sampling theory and frequency-domain signal processing. Computer automation of experimental control, data collection, and analysis, including error analysis and error propagation.
501
Relativity
Lorentz transformations in classical mechanics; relativistic kinematics; spacetime diagrams; relativistic energy and momentum conservation; Geometrical interpretation; applications of relativistic kinematics; four-vector formalism and tensors; introduction to general relativity; applications.
507
Solid State Physics
Crystal structure. Classification of solids and their bonding. Fermi surface. Elastic, electric and magnetic properties of solids.
509
Plasma Physics
Occurrence of plasmas in nature, single particle motion, plasmas as fluids, waves in plasmas, diffusion, resistivity, equilibrium and stability, kinetic theory of plasmas, non-linear effects.
521
Non-linear Dynamics and Chaos
Introduction to non-linear dynamical systems: Phase space representation, bifurcations, normal forms, non-linear oscillators, deterministic chaos, attractors, fractals, universality, renormalization, and synchronization.
543
Quantum Mechanics II
Intermediate quantum mechanics. Theory of angular momentum, symmetries, perturbation theory. Identical particles. Applications to atomic physics, spectroscopy. Entanglement.
561
Stable and Radioactive Isotope Studies, Fundamentals
A multidisciplinary course. Topics include nucleosynthesis, radioactive decay, isotope exchange phenomena, kinetic isotope effects, tracer techniques, molecular spectra and instrumentation.
577
Implementations of Quantum Information
Proposals and realizations of quantum information tasks including quantum computation, quantum communication, and quantum cryptography in optical, atomic, molecular, and solid state systems.
581
Computational Physics III
Linear inversion, spectral methods, calling external libraries, data formats, parallelization, numeric and symbolic programming languages.
593
Topics in Contemporary Physics
Topics will be from the research areas of staff members.
597
Senior Physics Laboratory
Selected advanced experiments. Where possible, students may choose those experiments most suited to their interests. Development of technical and computer-based skills, technical writing and presentation skills.
598
Honours Research Thesis
Each student will be assigned a project in consultation with a supervisor. Written reports and oral presentations are required.
599
Senior Research Thesis
Each student will be assigned a project in consultation with a supervisor. Written reports and oral presentations are required.
603
Experimental Methods of Physics
Instrumentation for physical experiments. General philosophy of experimentation; signal processes; signal processing methods; instrument design and control; data acquisition and storage; specific detection methods.
605
Advanced Data Analysis
Methods of extraction of significant information from experimental data degraded by noise. Parametric and non-parametric statistical methods; curve fitting; spectral analysis; filtering, sampling, convolution and deconvolution techniques.
609
Advanced Classical Mechanics
Variational principles, Lagrange's equations, Noether's theorem. Hamilton's equations and canonical transformations. Hamilton-Jacobi theory, action-angle variables. Perturbation theory.
611
Statistical Physics
Classical and quantum ensemble theory applied to interacting systems: real gases, spin lattices, phase transitions. Kinetic theory: Boltzmann equation, transport processes, irreversible processes and fluctuations.
613
Electrodynamics
Interaction between charged particles and the electromagnetic field in relativistic formulation. Scattering and energy losses of charged particles. Radiation by charged particles.
615
Non-Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
Mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics. Topics may include addition of angular momenta, Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, Wigner-Eckart theorem; charged particles in electric and magnetic fields; quantum operators; approximation methods; scattering; quantum nonlocality, Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox, Bell's theorem.
617
Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
Klein-Gordon and Dirac equations; Dirac spinor and the adjoint spinor; charge (C), parity (P) and (T) transformations and CPT symmetry; relativistic corrections to atomic spectra.
619
Statistical Physics II
Topics Theories of equilibrium and non-equilibrium critical phenomena and methods to study fluctuating systems selected from the following list of topics: Percolation, scaling theory, phase transitions, Landau-Ginzburg theory, lattice models, Monte Carlo methods, renormalization group, self-organized criticality, theory of random graphs; Brownian motion, random walks and diffusion, Fokker-Planck-Equation, Markov processes, stochastic differential equations, first passage times.
621
Nonlinear Dynamics and Pattern Formation
Topics: Introduction to pattern formation and self-organization in nature: Reaction-diffusion systems, hydrodynamical systems, bistable media, excitable and oscillatory media, stability analysis, bifurcations, pattern selection, amplitude equations and normal forms, fronts, traveling waves, topological defects, spiral waves, spatiotemporal chaos, defect-mediated turbulence, spatiotemporal point processes.
629
Gravitation
An introduction to Einstein's theory of gravitation. Applications to the solar system, black holes, and cosmology.
663
Applications of Stable Isotopes
Application of stable isotope techniques with special focus on Hydrogeology, Geology and Environmental Sciences. The use of isotopes to understand the water, carbon, nitrogen and sulphur cycles is demonstrated. Topics include hydrology, paleoclimates, geothermometry, fossil fuels exploration and recovery, pollutant tracing, food webs, forensic investigations, among others.
671
Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy
Atomic structure and spectra. Rotational, vibrational and electronic spectra of diatomic molecules, including microwave, infrared, Raman and visible/ultraviolet spectroscopic techniques. Hund's coupling cases. Polyatomic molecular spectroscopy. Examples from astronomy and upper atmosphere/space physics.
673
Quantum and Non-linear Optics
Theory of dispersion. Fast and slow light. Basics of nonlinear optics. Nonlinear optical crystals, phase matching. Coherence theory. Preparation, manipulation and measurement of quantum optical states and single-photon qubits. Elements of atomic physics, optical Bloch equation, rotating-wave approximation. Two-and three-level systems. Cavity quantum electrodynamics.
675
Special Topics in Laser and Optical Sciences
Lectures by Physics and Astronomy, Chemistry, Engineering, and/or Medicine staff on current research topics in laser science and modern optical techniques.
677
Implementations of Quantum Information
Proposals and realizations of quantum information tasks including quantum computation, quantum communication, and quantum cryptography in optical, atomic, molecular, and solid state systems.
691
Scientific Communication Skills

697
Topics in Contemporary Physics
Topics will be from the research areas of staff members.
699
Project in Physics
Each student will select a project in consultation with a staff member. The project may be experimental or theoretical in nature. A written report and an oral presentation are required.
701
Independent Study
Each student will select a topic of study in consultation with a staff member. The topic will be in the research area of the staff member. This course may not be used to meet the regular course requirements in the MSc and PhD programs.
Plant Biology
10
327
Systematics and Diversity of Plants
The diversity, form and function of plants ranging from algae, bryophytes (non-vascular land plants) and psilophytes to the angiosperms. Examples chosen to understand the origin of land plants and their subsequent evolution leading to highly diversified flowering plants.
401
Plant Biotechnology
The theory, application and history of plant biotechnology. Plant genome structure and the regulation of gene expression. Transcript, protein and metabolic profiling. Recombinant gene transfer into the plant genome. Biotechnological approaches to crop improvement, soil remediation and value-added traits.
403
Plant Physiology
An integrative examination of the major physiological and metabolic processes in plants from the cellular to the whole-plant level. Emphasis on internal and external controls of growth and development; photosynthesis; nutrient assimilation; plant hormone metabolism and action; and stress physiology.
421
Plant Cell Biology and Anatomy
Study of plants at the cell and tissue level. Focus is on subcellular organization and dynamics, and on the structural and functional roles of cell and tissue systems. Lab sessions will emphasize brightfield and fluorescence microscopy imaging.
507
Advanced Topics in Plant Biology
Research or reading project that may include seminars, lectures, term papers and training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods.
528
Independent Studies in Plant Biology
Original and independent thought, practical research and the completion of written and oral reports.
530
Honours Research Project in Plant Biology
Research project under the direction of one or more faculty members in the Department of Biological Sciences. Formal written and oral reports must be presented on completion of this course. Open only to Honours Botany students or Honours Biological Sciences students.
541
Taxonomy of the Seed Plants
A study of plants in relation to classification, phylogeny, evolution and identification. Students are required to make a plant collection of fifty plant specimens for identification in the laboratory. It is recommended that the collection be made in the preceding summer.
543
Plant Signaling and Development
Physiology, biochemistry, molecular and cellular aspects of plant growth and development. Emphasis on the co-ordinated regulation of gene expression, cell-cell communication, and signalling during development. Discussion on the methods used to study development, such as mutants of Arabidopsis and other model systems.
633
Current Topics in Plant Biology
Topics include: plant genomics, biotechnology, biochemistry, cell biology, development and evolutionary biology. Emphasis is on technical advances and their application to plant biology research.
Political Science
120
201
Introduction to Government and Politics
A systematic introduction to the basic concepts and institutions of the process of politics.
213
Political Ideologies
An introduction to the study of political ideologies such as nationalism, socialism, liberalism and fascism.
279
Politics of the Global South
An introduction to political issues common to the developing regions of Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Middle East, with special emphasis on topics such as democratization, globalization, development, and human rights.
283
Issues and Trends in World Politics
Major trends and issues in world politics, such as international tensions, migration, ethnic conflicts, human rights and sustainable development.
302
Topics in Politics
Introductory examination of a topic in Political Science with a Canadian Politics, Comparative Politics, International Relations, or Political Theory focus.
310
History of Political Thought
An introduction to some of the most profound attempts to think about the meaning, limits, and possibilities of political life through an examination of selected central texts within the history of Western political philosophy.
321
Politics and Government in Canada
An examination of institutions and political processes in Canada. Significant attention is paid to key institutions such as Parliament, the executive, federalism, the Constitution, and the courts. Emphasis is also placed on the way that political processes are shaped by these and other institutions.
342
Law and Politics
An introduction to the interplay between legal and political personnel, institutions, and processes. Examination of these connections in democratic states focusing on Canada in comparative perspective, authoritarian regimes, transitional and hybrid regimes, and the international system.
345
Indigenous Governance
An examination of the institutions and logics of Indigenous governance structures in Canada. Emphasis will be placed on understanding how inter-Indigenous modes of governance contrast with institutions created by non-Indigenous politicians and bureaucrats. Attention will be paid to kinship, gender relations, war and conflict, and treaty land management.
357
Introduction to Public Policy Analysis
An introduction to themes and methods in public policy studies. The practical and normative problems facing governments in initiating, formulating, enacting, and implementing policy will be discussed. May include case studies.
359
Introduction to Comparative Politics
An introduction to the central concepts, problems, and approaches that comprise the field of comparative politics. Emphasis may also be placed on key analytical challenges, competing methods, and basic governance systems in selected parts of the world.
369
Governments and Politics of the Middle East
A survey and analysis of the organization and functioning of governments and politics of the contemporary Middle East, with emphasis on the social and economic environments which influence them.
371
Governments and Politics of Africa
Political institutions of selected African states. The influence of class and tribal structure; political parties; elections, the source and nature of ideologies; and economic and social policies.
379
The Politics of Development
A comparative survey of contemporary approaches to development theory and economics such as: modernization, neo-liberalism, post-development, critical globalism, gender and development, environment and development. Issues treated include poverty, cultural diversity, sustainability, and the role of state, market, NGOs, and science and technology.
381
Introduction to International Relations
The structures and processes of international relations and foreign policy.
397
Introduction to Research Methods
Introduction to the questions, strategies and rationales of political science research methods. Emphasis on the practical and theoretical advantages and disadvantages of quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods approaches.
398
Qualitative Research Methods
An introduction to qualitative research methods in Political Science. Topics may include qualitative methodology, elite interviewing, focus groups, content analysis, case studies and qualitative data analysis.
399
Quantitative Research Methods
Quantitative research design, measurement, data collection, and data analysis.
402
Advanced Topics in Politics
Advanced examination of a topic in Political Science with a Canadian Politics, Comparative Politics, International Relations, or Political Theory focus
406
Greek Love and Wisdom
A study of Ancient Greek attempts to address the relationship between love, sex, marriage, friendship, and how we might best lead our lives in a political community. Works by Aristophanes, Plato, Xenophon, Aristotle, Plutarch and others may be covered.
407
Classical Political Thought
An examination of selected classical texts from historians, dramatists and political philosophers with special focus upon the concepts relevant to political problems in the twentieth century.
409
The Foundations of Modernity
A study of selected sixteenth- to nineteenth-century political thinkers and themes foundational to the making and understanding of modernity in the West. Works by Rousseau, Kant, J.S. Mill, and others may be covered.
411
Recent Critics and Defenders of Modernity
A study of debates in recent political thought between theorists who take a strong stand against the universalistic and rational foundations of Enlightenment-based political thought (such as poststructuralists, postmodernists, communitarians, and Far Right populists) and defenders of Enlightenment modernity (such as liberals and Frankfurt School Critical Theorists).
413
Politics and Literature
Political analysis of how selected works of literature articulate visions of order and disorder.
415
Politics through Film
An examination of the complex relationship between politics and film, through selected fictional and documentary works.
417
Feminist Political Theory
A comparative and critical survey of the main contemporary feminist approaches to political theory: this may include liberal feminism, radical/cultural feminism, socialist/Marxist feminism, and post-modern/post-colonial feminism.
422
Indigenous Politics in Canada
An introduction to historical and contemporary socio-political issues associated with Indigenous peoples and state-society relations in Canada.
425
City Government
A study of both institutions and political processes relating to city politics.
426
Federalism
Theoretical and empirical examination of federalism in Canada and other selected states.
427
Government and Politics of Alberta
An analysis of the institutions and processes of Alberta's government as well as activities in selected policy areas. The examination will include historical as well as contemporary references.
428
Comparative Provincial Politics
An analysis of provincial politics in Canada focusing on the distinctive political environments as well as similarities and differences in provincial political cultures, party systems and elections, and selected policy areas.
429
Electoral Behaviour
An examination of how and why citizens engage with their governments. Topics may include individual and group influences on citizen participation, electoral choice, and political behaviour in Canada and other democracies.
430
Public Opinion
An investigation of theories of public opinion in representative democracies and of survey techniques employed in their examination. A portion of the course will normally be devoted to developing and administering a public opinion survey.
431
Canadian Political Parties
An examination of political parties and party systems in Canada. Party history is reviewed and attention is given to issues relating to organization, finance, representation and electoral competition.
432
Selecting and Removing Political Leaders
An examination of the processes political parties use to choose and remove their leaders. The focus is on Canadian parties with comparisons to selected parties in other countries.
433
Urban Policy and Governance
Examination of policy issues in Canadian cities, with a special focus on domains involving complex governance challenges. Emphasis on the consequences of policy governance for urban public policy, political authority, and democratic accountability.
435
Canada and World Politics
An analysis and evaluation of Canada's role on the international scene; main objectives of Canadian foreign policy; security and defence policies; Canada's participation in universal international organizations; the influence of Canada as a middle power upon world events.
439
Strategic Studies
An analysis of the causes of war, the meaning of security and defence in the post-Cold War era, including the use and control of military force.
440
Campaigns and Elections
Explores election campaigns in Canada through case studies of key elements such as the selection of candidates, the building of campaign teams and the strategies and tactics parties use to elect candidates and win general elections.
444
Constitutional Law and Politics
The law and politics of the Canadian constitution, including the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the federal division of powers, and responsible parliamentary government.
447
Comparative Public Policy
An examination of a range of public policy issues from a comparative perspective. Topics include social policy, family policy, immigration and multiculturalism, and environmental policy across the advanced industrialized democracies.
451
Public Administration
Theories of public administration and their practical application in Canada and selected countries.
453
Women and Politics
An examination of current trends in women’s political participation in Canada and around the world. Topics may include: women’s political behaviour, women’s political representation, and women’s movements’ engagement with political institutions.
455
Protest, Rebellion, and Revolution
A study of the origins, processes, and outcomes of peaceful and violent forms of political protest, rebellion and revolution. Cases may include historical and contemporary examples from around the world.
463
Politics of Post-Industrial States
Comparative analysis of the political dynamics of post-industrial states. Focus on problems associated with post-industrialization and on explanations for political stability and change.
464
European Politics
An introduction to the governments and politics of the states and societies of Europe, including the importance of their membership in the European Union.
465
Chinese Politics
An introduction to the politics of the Chinese communist party-state. Topics may include: the Mao era leadership debates on socialist development; the post-Mao reforms of Deng Xiaoping and his successors; and the emerging challenges associated with market reforms and China’s integration into the global capitalist economy.
469
Middle East: Contemporary Political Problems
An in-depth analysis of selected political, economic and social problems and issues affecting individual nations and the area in general.
470
Genocide
An introduction to comparative genocide studies. Examines the causes, structures, and dynamics of genocide and mass violence.
471
Africa: Contemporary Political Problems
An analysis of political problems in selected political systems of Africa. Topics will include the politics of rural development, political elites and the state in Africa, political institutions, constraints on development, and urban politics.
473
States Regimes in Latin America
An analysis of how selected Latin American states and societies are addressing both old and new problems such as the transitions from and legacies of dictatorship, political and criminal violence, as well as the construction of democratic institutions and inclusive citizenship.
477
American Politics
A study of the institutions and processes of American politics.
479
International Relations of the Contemporary Arab World
An examination of the Arab regional system, with emphasis on regional interaction, regional organizations, and external linkages. The specific cultural, political, ideological, and strategic characteristics of the system will be analyzed.
481
The Politics of Human Rights
An analysis of the origins, evolution, and contemporary politics of human rights. Topics may include the philosophic and religious roots of human rights; international and domestic human rights laws; and struggles to promote and protect human rights in specific contexts around the world.
483
International Law
The basic concepts, principles, and functions of international law.
485
Global Political Economy
Analysis of the politics of international economic relations. Topics may include the politics of trade and money relations, energy, multinational corporations, and the New International Economic Order.
487
International Organizations
An analysis of international governmental organizations with main emphasis on the United Nations and selected regional organizations.
491
U.S. Security Policy
Examination of U.S. security policy, with emphasis on how it is made and on contemporary security issues the U.S. faces.
502
Advanced Topics Seminar in Politics
Advanced seminar on a topic in political science with a Canadian politics, comparative politics, international relations, or political theory focus.
503
Selected Topics in Political Theory
Content of the course will vary from year-to-year.
505
Sexual Ethics
An examination of attempts to theorize those things associated with human sexuality using works of historical and contemporary political philosophy. Topics may include: the nature of love and friendship, the good of marriage, limits of sexuality, and the place of justice, equality, and shame.
506
Social and Global Justice
An examination of contemporary theories and debates in social and global justice. Topics may include: the redistribution-recognition dilemma, multiculturalism, intersectionality, identity/post-identity politics, globalization, transnationalization, and post-Westphalian approaches to governance and democracy.
515
Advanced History of Political Thought
An intensive study of selected major political thinkers within the history of political thought.
519
Interpretation and War
An examination of the philosophical justifications offered to defend the use of military force, based particularly on the analysis of texts in the history of Western political philosophy.
521
Canadian Federalism
An examination of the dynamics of Canadian Federalism including relations among provinces and between provinces and the federal government.
523
Canada and the Circumpolar World
An examination of critical national and international issues in the circumpolar world.
524
Advanced Seminar in Indigenous Politics in Canada
Engagement with the contributions made by Indigenous scholars to rethinking Canadian politics. Emphasis on Indigenous scholars’ critiques of colonialism and settler-colonialism in Canada, and the decolonizing potential of Indigenous political thought.
525
Energy Politics in Alberta
An examination of energy politics in Alberta. Topics may include the federal-provincial dimensions of energy politics and policymaking, environmental politics, and the economic dimensions of energy policy.
531
Parties, Elections and Representation
An examination of political parties and elections in both established and emerging democracies as a means of understanding the nature of political representation in modern representative democracies.
543
Law and Armed Conflict
An examination of key texts and topics concerning the evolution, conceptualization, codification, and practical application of the laws of armed conflict. Topics may include the historical and philosophical development of the customary and codified laws of armed conflict, military law and military training and education, and the use of law to punish and deter war crimes.
551
Women in Canadian Politics
A political history of women in Canada in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Topics include campaigns for suffrage, legal personhood and equality rights, women's political activism, the evolution of public policy concerning women, and the participation of women in public life.
554
Women and Public Policy
An examination of the impact of public policies on gender relations from a comparative perspective. Topics may include family and social policies, gender and the workplace, reproductive rights, and gender-based violence.
561
Government and Politics of the European Union
An examination of the politics of the European Union. May be offered as a seminar or in preparation for and participation in a model European Council Meeting.
565
Indigenous Politics in the Global South
Advanced examination of the competing theoretical explanations for the sudden and unexpected rise of Indigenous peoples as key political actors in countries of the Global South. May include Indigenous rights struggles in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
569
Selected Topics in Middle East Politics
Emphasis will be on foreign-policy development and application in the Middle East.
575
Intelligence and Policy

579
Political Economy of Development
Third World development projects, programs, and policies in Africa, Asia and Latin America, intended to raise the standard of living and enhance political participation.
581
Selected Topics in International Law and Organizations
An advanced seminar on international order and on co-operative and competitive efforts by states and other international actors to create, maintain and change that order.
585
Preventing the Spread of Nuclear Weapons
An analysis of the politics of the international regime governing the control of nuclear weapons, including case studies of states that pose a challenge to that regime.
586
Advanced Studies in Global Political Economy
Advanced analysis of selected themes in global political economy. Topics may include trade, migration, exchange rates, and foreign direct investment.
587
International Ethics
An examination of ethical reasoning and moral norms in political decision making, institutions, and processes in international politics. Topics such as justice in relation to war and terrorism, sovereignty, intervention and human rights, globalization and global poverty, and the environment may be analyzed.
590
Honours Seminar
An examination of classic works in political science.
591
Honours Thesis
Preparation of an honours thesis under the supervision of a faculty member who will assign the final grade.
597
Directed Readings in Political Science
Study of a particular topic under the direct supervision of a faculty member.
605
Advanced Introduction to Sexual Ethics
An advanced introduction to theorizing human sexuality using works of historical and contemporary political philosophy. Topics may include: the nature of love and friendship, the good of marriage, limits of sexuality, and the place of justice, equality, and shame.
606
Social and Global Justice
An examination of contemporary theories and debates in social and global justice. Topics may include: the redistribution-recognition dilemma, multiculturalism, intersectionality, identity/post-identity politics, globalization, transnationalization, and post-Westphalian approaches to governance and democracy.
615
Advanced History of Political Thought
An intensive study of selected major political thinkers within the history of political thought.
617
Advanced Political Theory
Discussion of contemporary topics in political thought. Emphasis on analysis of problems rather than history of ideas.
619
War and Interpretation
An examination of the philosophical justifications offered to defend the use of military force, based particularly on the analysis of texts in the history of Western political philosophy.
621
Canadian Political Institutions
Examination of the structure and operation of the central institutions of the Canadian state, including the constitution, federalism, parliamentary government, and political parties.
623
Canadian Political Process
Examination of Canadian political behaviour within its institutional context, including political parties, interest groups, voting and socialization.
624
Advanced Seminar on Indigenous-State Relations in Canada
Structure and operation of colonialism and settler-colonialism in Canada, and Indigenous resistance to those structures of oppression. Attention will be paid to the reconciliation debates, Indigenous gender oppression, and the politics of decolonization in Canada.
631
Parties, Elections and Representation
An examination of political parties and elections in both established and emerging democracies as a means of understanding the nature of political representation in modern representative democracies.
633
U.S. Security Policy
An examination of U.S. security policy, with an emphasis both on how U.S. security policy is made and on the main contemporary security issues the U.S. faces today.
641
Selected Topics in Public Law
Examination of the political, philosophical, and institutional dimensions of selected public law issues, with particular reference to judicial and quasi-judicial tribunals as policy-making institutions. Consult the Department for information on choice of topics.
643
Law and Armed Conflict
An examination of key texts and topics concerning the evolution, conceptualization, codification, and practical application of the laws of armed conflict. Topics may include the historical and philosophical development of the customary and codified laws of armed conflict, military law and military training and education, and the use of law to punish and deter war crimes.
651
Politics and Public Policy
An examination of the main theories and approaches to the study of public policy.
653
Gender and Public Policy
Explores the gendered impact of a range of public policies and also explores the influence of gender norms and ideas on the formulation of public policy. Topics covered include gender-based policy analysis, gender and the welfare state, family and child-care policies, policies to address gender inequalities in the labour market and workplace, and reproductive rights policies.
665
Advanced Seminar on Indigenous Politics in the Global South
Advanced examination of the competing theoretical explanations for the sudden and unexpected rise of Indigenous peoples as key political actors in countries of the Global South. In-depth case studies may include Indigenous rights struggles in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
671
Comparative Politics of Development in the Global South
An examination of the major issues, theories, and debates about development and politics in the Global South.
673
Comparative Politics: Theories and Methods
An examination of the main theories, methods, and debates in the field of Comparative Politics.
675
Selected Topics in Advanced Comparative Politics
Selected regions and topics in Comparative Politics.
681
Advanced Analysis of International Relations
An examination of the main theories, issues, and approaches in the study of International Relations.
683
Advanced Studies in Foreign Policy
Selected themes in the formation and implementation of foreign policies.
684
Human Rights and Humanitarianism
An advanced introduction to the principal contemporary debates in the field of human rights and humanitarian politics.
685
Strategic Studies
Advanced seminar in major topics in strategic studies, such as arms control, deterrence, and other military doctrines.
686
Advanced Seminar in Global Political Economy
Covering in-depth major debates in global political economy, provides an advanced exploration of the causes and effects of globalization, including the determinants of foreign economic policymaking (such as trade, money, migration, global production, finance, and foreign aid) as well as the subsequent impact of these policies.
687
Advanced Studies in Canadian Arctic Security
The Canadian Arctic is an emerging area of concern due to changes scarcely imaginable even a few years ago. Examines the nature of some of these changes—e.g., climate change and the northern seas’ dramatically changing ice conditions, growing recognition of the regions’ resource wealth, and evolving international relations in the circumpolar region—and what they mean for Canadian Arctic security.
689
Unconventional Warfare
Analysis of warfare conducted by, or against, sub-state groups. This may include in-depth studies of guerrilla warfare, asymmetric conflict, or terrorism.
691
Quantitative Analysis in Political Science
Examination of empirical research methods and techniques of quantitative analysis in the study of political phenomena. Computer use is required.
693
Advanced Quantitative Analysis in Political Science
Examination of advanced empirical research methods and techniques of multivariate quantitative analysis in the study of political phenomena.
699
Qualitative Analysis in Political Science
An introduction to qualitative research methods in Political Science. Topics may include qualitative methodology, elite interviewing, focus groups, content analysis, case studies and qualitative data analysis.
715
Special Topics in Political Theory

721
Special Topics in Canadian Politics

723
Special Topics in Political Science

725
Special Topics in Public Administration

741
Special Topics in Public Law

755
Special Topics in Public Policy

781
Special Topics in International Relations

791
Scope and Methods in Political Science
Advanced seminar covering various approaches, topics, methods and theories employed in the discipline of political science.
Professional Land Management
5
475
Introduction to Professional Land Management
Professional land management including both technical and economic considerations in the search for and development and marketing of oil and gas resources. A field trip and/or simulation exercise may be required.
573
Energy Business Agreements
Legal requirements in the acquisition, disposition, and exploration of and production from energy rights and contracts in Canada.
579
Professional Land Management Policy
Prepare graduates to effectively contribute to the management of energy properties throughout the life of the properties by increasing the understanding and awareness of corporate resource property valuation techniques.
583
Management of Energy Regulation
Overview of key regulations and surface regulatory principles important to energy resources.
587
Cases in Professional Land Management
A "Hands on" case approach to the typical situations and decision-making processes faced by landmen and commercial negotiators. Historical perspectives, contemporary tactics, and modern applications for departments and energy companies.
Psychology
110
200
Principles of Psychology I
A survey of topics associated with psychology’s role as a biological science, including neuroscience, sensation and perception, cognition, learning, memory, and language.
201
Principles of Psychology II
A survey of topics associated with psychology’s role as a social science, including personality, motivation, health, social, developmental, industrial/organizational and clinical psychology.
203
Psychology for Everyday Life
Provides students with an understanding of the key theories, research methods, and discoveries in coping and resilience, identity development, interpersonal relationships, and mental health with an emphasis on developing the knowledge and skills necessary to be effective consumers of psychological theory and research. Through a focus on adjustment issues that arise in everyday life, this course will demonstrate some of the ways in which psychology can be used to benefit students’ wellbeing in their personal and professional lives.
204
Human Sexuality
Examination of contemporary knowledge and attitudes toward human sexuality, relying on theoretical and empirical psychological research. Multiple perspectives are presented, including psychosocial, cross-cultural, and psychobiological. Sexuality across the life span is examined, including issues pertaining to sexual differentiation, intimacy and communication, gender role development, varieties of sexual relationships and behaviour, and legal and ethical issues.
300
Research Methods and Data Analysis in Psychology I
Research methods in psychological research, with an introduction to data analysis.
301
Research Methods and Data Analysis in Psychology II
An integration of research methods and statistics in psychological research, with an emphasis on conducting and interpreting inferential statistical techniques.
305
History of Psychological Thought
The roots of psychological thought in Western culture, and the relationship between theories of human nature and changing social institutions.
321
Industrial and Organizational Psychology
Understanding and predicting behaviour and attitudes within an organizational setting. Topics normally include: personnel selection, attraction to organizations and job choice, person-organization fit, organizational culture, motivation and decision-making, employee attitudes, deviant behaviour in organizations, leadership, team behaviour, and personality in the workplace.
345
Social Psychology
Social psychological approaches to understanding social influence, social perception and cognition, attitudes and group dynamics.
349
Language Development
Research into language development in typically developing children, with consideration of environmental and other factors that influence acquisition. Consideration also given to atypical language development.
351
Developmental Psychology
An examination of psychological development through childhood and adolescence.
353
Psychology of Aging
Examines theory and research related to psychological processes during adulthood and aging. Topics may include life-span developmental theories and methods; biological processes; sensory, perceptual and cognitive processes; personality and social processes; life transitions, mental health issues; and dying.
365
Cognitive Psychology
A survey of research and theory in cognitive psychology. Research in pattern recognition, attention, memory, language, thinking, and other cognitive abilities is explored, with discussion of associated brain mechanisms.
369
Sensation and Perception
The psychological and physiological bases of sensory and perceptual processes, including vision, audition, taste, smell, touch, proprioception, and basic psychophysics. Provides a background for advanced courses in sensory and perceptual processing, human factors, and environmental psychology.
373
Motivation and Emotion
A survey of theories, models, and research on the psychological aspects of human motivation from social, cognitive, behavioural, and biological perspectives.
375
Brain and Behaviour
The neural basis of learning, memory, language and thinking, as well as pathological, sexual, aggressive, and emotional behaviour that arises from neural and hormonal malfunctioning.
383
Personality
Approaches to the study of personality.
385
Abnormal Psychology
Abnormal behaviour and experiences, their causes and treatment throughout the lifespan.
391
Academic Competencies in Psychology
Students acquire personal and academic competencies to support program success including effective communication, critical thinking, information literacy, and techniques to set realistic goals.
393
Professional Development in Psychology
Students acquire professional and career development skills to prepare for the transition into the workplace. Students explore career options and develop materials to increase success in professional and job opportunities.
400
Conducting Research

405
Contemporary Theories in Psychology
An analysis of what constitutes a "theory," "model" and "explanation" in psychology as a science. Survey of major theoretical positions in twentieth-century psychology.
407
Psychometrics
Theory and application of methodological and statistical issues in psychological assessment. Topics include: theories of psychological measurement, scale development, item analysis, item bias, reliability, validity, and test fairness.
411
Design and Analysis in Psychological Research
Experimental design problems and techniques for analysis of psychological data.
415
Qualitative Inquiry in Psychology
Qualitative approaches to psychological research such as phenomenology, grounded theory, and discourse analysis. Specific topics include research interviews, ethics, and evaluating qualitative research.
417
Tests and Individual Differences
Individual differences and psychological testing including the description, use, evaluation and development of typical tests, as well as discussion of important issues in human difference.
425
Human Factors
Application of psychological research and theory to people-system relationships and the work environment; display and control devices, design and evaluation of the built environment, human skills and limitations, work schedules, safety, and research methods in human factors engineering.
427
Environmental Psychology
The theory and data pertaining to the relationship between human behaviour and the physical environment, both natural and built. Particular emphasis is placed on the implications of current knowledge for the management of the human-environment interface. A research project is an integral part of the course.
429
Adolescence
An in-depth examination of the physical, cognitive, emotional, and social changes occurring during adolescence, drawing upon theory and relevant research.
430
Psychophysiology in Health Research
An examination of the impact of emotions on physiological activity and risk for disease, including coronary heart disease, ulcers, asthma, cancer and other immune-related disorders, with an emphasis on the discussion and understanding of empirical research. Hands-on experience with psychophysiological measurement equipment and procedures commonly used in stress research will be provided.
431
Current Issues in Psychopathology
Discussion of current developments and controversies in the assessment, etiology, and treatment of psychopathology. Emphasis will be on teaching students how to strengthen their critical thinking skills using controversial issues in the fields of abnormal and clinical psychology as a basis for discussion and debate.
433
Clinical Psychology
Assessment and treatment problems in clinical settings.
435
Behaviour Therapy
Theory, principles, and practices of contemporary behaviour therapy/behaviour modification as applied to a representative range of disorders, problems, and child and adult populations.
437
Health Psychology
Health psychology involves the discipline and principles of psychology and human behaviour in understanding how the mind, body, and behaviour interact in health and disease. Class topics include psychosocial models of health and disease, stress and coping, health enhancing and health damaging behaviours, pain management, and a variety of specific behaviour-related medical illnesses (e.g., heart disease, cancer, insomnia).
439
Psychology of Gender
An analysis of psychological theory and research on gender situated within the interdisciplinary field of gender studies. Topics include the meaning of gender, psychological development and gender, and gender and interpersonal relationships.
442
Intergroup Relations
In-depth exploration of intergroup relations from a social psychological perspective. Theory and research about the processes involved in stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination.
443
Interpersonal Relationships
Application of social psychological theory and methodology to a variety of topics in the area of interpersonal relationships such as attraction, close relationships, interpersonal conflict, communication, and power. Course projects will be an integral part of the course.
445
Psychology of Morality
An exploration of the origins and nature of moral conduct from the perspective of psychological theory and research. Examination of the naturalistic basis for why people care about morality, behave morally or not, and the psychological bases of moral judgment. Topics may include the evolutionary basis for morality, moral intuitionism, moral development, and moral judgment.
447
Advanced Topics in Personality or Social Psychology
An examination of current research topics in personality or social psychology or gender.
449
Social-Personality Development
Socialization processes and behaviours from birth to adolescence; observational learning, altruism, moral development, sex-roles, dependency, emotional development, and social motivation.
451
Cognitive Development
Current and classic research in the area of cognitive development is explored. Topics may include sensory and perceptual development, language acquisition, symbolic representation, concept formation, memory, and social-cognitive development. Laboratory projects introduce methodologies used in research with children.
455
Sensory, Perceptual, and Cognitive Aspects of Aging
Basic research and contemporary issues in the age-related changes in sensation, perception, attention, learning and memory, intelligence and problem-solving.
457
Social and Clinical Aspects of Aging
Stability and change in the later years of life with a focus on social and clinical areas of aging.
459
Developmental Psychopathology
A critical examination of developmental psychopathology during childhood and adolescence with an emphasis on the characteristics of the disorders, their determinants, and outcomes. Current theories and research, and recent trends in intervention and prevention will be emphasized.
463
Memory
Current memory research is explored. Topics include how memories are encoded, and retrieved. Laboratory projects introduce methodologies used in memory research.
467
Experimental Psycholinguistics
Exploration of the cognitive, neuropsychological, and social processes that underlie language abilities, with reference to linguistic theory.
469
Vision
A systematic examination of vision and its role in our interactions with the natural environment. Topics may include: the physics of light; optics; eye and retina; visual pathways and visual brain; perception of colour, space, change and motion; visual development and aging; art and vision; visual disorders; and recovery from blindness.
471
Auditory Cognitive Neuroscience
Exploration of auditory perception from an auditory cognitive neuroscience perspective, using music and speech as domains of inquiry. Focus on acoustics, psychophysics, cognitive psychology, cognitive development, neurophysiology, and neuropsychology. Includes hands-on exercises in sound manipulation and experimentation.
473
Evolution and Human Behaviour
An examination of the scientific synthesis of evolutionary biology and modern psychology, which offers a novel approach to such issues as short-term and long-term human mating strategies, short-term sexual strategies, conflict between the sexes, parental investment, aggression, and social dominance.
474
Neuroscience of Learning and Memory
An examination of learning and memory from a neuroscience perspective. Molecular, cellular, systems-level, and behavioural approaches will be applied to themes such as consolidation, amnesia, and pathological processes.
475
Drugs and Behaviour
The behavioural effects of drugs specifically employed to affect the nervous system, as seen in the treatment of mental disorders, behavioural disorders, and other conditions such as Parkinson's, Huntington's and Alzheimer's diseases. Neuro-pharmacologic agents will be discussed as they relate to the biochemistry and physiology of putative neurotransmitters.
477
Sleep and Biological Rhythms
Behaviours are temporally co-ordinated and occur in a rhythmic fashion. The most obvious rhythmic behaviour humans engage in is sleeping; we spend one-third of our lives asleep. This course will survey the behavioural, physiological, and clinical aspects of sleep and biological rhythms.
478
Behavioural Neuroscience
An examination of the neural underpinnings of behaviour. Experimental approaches, neural mechanisms, and health implications will be explored through both lecture material and laboratory exercises.
479
Human Neuropsychology
Integration of the literature on human brain damage with the evidence from animal research. Topics include developmental neuropsychology; cognitive deficits associated with frontal, parietooccipital, and temporal lobes; origins and mechanisms in the determination of cerebral dominancy; disorders of learning and memory; long-term effects of cerebral lesions.
481
Advanced Topics in Organizational Psychology

483
Advanced Topics in Personnel Psychology

491
Cross-Cultural Cognition
Theory and research on the interaction of culture and human cognition. Topics include cross-cultural research in perception, language processing, memory, concepts, and reasoning.
492
Indigenous Psychology
An in-depth examination of research in psychology related to Indigenous populations, including the history of research, major topics, appropriate approaches to conducting research, and new directions.
493
Psychology and Law
Consideration of the contributions of psychological theory and research to the understanding of crime investigation, courtroom dynamics, and the legal system. Specific topics may include eyewitness testimony, police practices, judge and jury decision making, lie detection and confessions, and expert testimony. Topics will be discussed from the perspectives of social and cognitive psychology.
495
Consumer Psychology
Consideration of the psychological concepts used to understand the processes involved in consumer behaviour. Specific topics may include research methodology, individual and group influences, marketing strategies, and consumer decision making. Topics will be discussed from the perspectives of cognitive and social psychology.
497
Consciousness
An exploration of the origin, nature, and function of consciousness as informed by research on conscious and unconscious processes, psychological disorders, neuropsychological case studies, consciousness-altering drugs, hypnosis, meditation, state-dependent memory, sleep, and dreams.
499
Research Experience in Psychology

501
Honours Topics Seminar in Psychology
Selected topics from one or more areas in psychology.
502
Selected Topics in Psychology with Lab
Selected topics from one or more areas in psychology.
503
Selected Topics in Psychology
Selected topics from one or more areas in psychology.
504
Research in Psychology
Research project in psychology conducted under the supervision of a faculty member.
505
Research in Psychology
Research project in psychology conducted under the supervision of a faculty member.
521
Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience
An examination of how the human central nervous system controls higher order, complex behaviours. Experimental and clinical evidence for the neurobiological regulation of memory, language, attention, perception and emotion will be evaluated.
531
Nervous System Development
This course will cover the fundamental principles of the development of nervous systems, integrating anatomical, cellular, molecular, genetic, and behavioural approaches.
585
Advanced Themes in Psychopathology
Examination of assessment, phenomenology, etiology, and/or treatment of common psychological disorders. Course will cover few disorders in greater detail.
591
Advanced Topics in Cognitive Psychology
A detailed examination of current research topics in cognitive psychology. Topics may include one or more of the following: human memory, thinking, attention, language processing, and computer modelling.
598
Honours Thesis and Seminar
Research project under the direction of a member of the Department. In the seminar, students will present and discuss their projects and other topics of current relevance.
601
History and Systems of Psychology
History of psychological concepts in Western culture, major theoretical systems of twentieth-century psychology, foundational assumptions of theories in contemporary psychology.
607
Advanced Research Design and Methodology in Psychology
Survey of advanced topics in the conduct of psychological research including issues in philosophy of science; origins of research ideas; validity and reliability; measurement; experimental, quasi-experimental, and non–experimental designs; survey research; specialized methods such as computer simulation, psychophysiological methods, event-sampling, online data collection, and cognitive procedures; and ethics.
611
Advanced Qualitative Inquiry in Psychology
Qualitative research designs and historical research in psychology. Advanced study of selected qualitative approaches in psychology to include research design, methods, and analysis. Specific topics covered include foundations of qualitative research, evaluation and practical techniques including computerized analysis.
613
Signal and Systems Analysis in Behavioural Research
Application of signal and systems analysis to behavioural neuroscience and psychophysics.
615
Analysis of Variance
Applications of the general linear model to research design and analysis. Topics include analysis of variance, regression, and analysis of covariance.
617
Multivariate Data Analysis
Multivariate techniques and design issues, including canonical correlation, discriminant analysis, multivariate analysis of variance, multivariate regression, principal components analysis and factor analysis.
619
Special Topics in the Design of Psychological Research

620
Advanced Topics in Brain and Cognitive Sciences
An advanced survey of some of the fundamental issues and recent developments in the Brain and/or Cognitive Sciences. Topics will vary.
623
Functional Neuroanatomy
Human neuroanatomy and the development of the central nervous system. Functional relationships between brain and behaviour in a variety of domains (sensorimotor, language, memory, affective processing, social behaviour, etc).
625
Clinical Neuropsychology

627
Neuropsychological Testing
The clinical assessment of neuropsychological functioning in children and adults using a hypothesis-testing model. Fundamentals of administration, scoring, and interpretation of core tests used in neuropsychological assessment.
630
Advanced Topics in Social and Theoretical Psychology
An advanced survey of some of the fundamental issues and recent developments in Social and/or Theoretical Psychology. Topics will vary.
639
Advanced Industrial and Organizational Psychology
Application of psychological principles, research and methods relating to human interactions and performance in work settings.
641
Advanced Topics in Health Psychology
Introduces students to current research issues in health psychology. Focuses primarily on issues related to the study of chronic illnesses and evaluates the role of psychological/behavioural factors in: the etiology of disease, disease prevention, adaptation to illness, and disease progression.
650
Research Seminar in Clinical Psychology
An introduction to research and design issues in clinical psychology.
651
Psychopathology
Current theory, issues, and research regarding the epidemiology, etiology, diagnosis, and prognosis of psychopathology. Implications for assessment and treatment.
659
Ethics and Professional Issues in Clinical Psychology
Ethical and legal standards for clinical psychologists. An introduction to professional issues in contemporary clinical practice.
660
Summer Practicum in Clinical Psychology
Supervised training experience in an approved clinical setting. Provides exposure to basic issues and techniques in the practice of psychological assessment.
671
Psychological Assessment of Adults
An overview of theoretical, professional, and ethical issues in the psychological assessment of adult clinical populations. Instruction in the administration and interpretation of assessment procedures for adults including interviews, behavioural assessments, and selected intellectual and personality tests. Supervised practical experience in the application of adult assessments in a relevant clinical setting.
673
Psychopathology and Psychological Assessment of Children
An overview of theoretical, professional and ethical issues in the psychopathology and psychological assessment of child clinical populations. Instruction in the administration and interpretation of child and family assessment procedures including interviews, behavioural assessments, and selected psychological tests. Supervised practical experience in the application of child and family assessments in a relevant clinical setting.
681
Adult Psychotherapy
Theory, research, and practice in adult psychotherapy and behaviour change. Supervised exposure to the practice of adult psychotherapy in a relevant clinical setting.
683
Child Psychotherapy
Theory, research, and practice in child and family psychotherapy and behaviour change. Supervised exposure to the practice of child and family psychotherapy in a relevant clinical setting.
700
Integrative Seminar in Psychology
Selected interdisciplinary topics in Psychology. Topics will vary.
702
Research in Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Completion of a research project in Brain and/or Cognitive Sciences conducted under the supervision of a faculty member. Topics may vary.
703
Research in Social and Theoretical Psychology
Completion of a research project in the areas of Social and/or Theoretical Psychology conducted under the supervision of a faculty member. Topics may vary.
709
Research in Industrial/Organizational Psychology
Completion of a research project in Industrial/Organizational Psychology conducted under the supervision of a faculty member. Topics may vary.
710
Integrative Seminar in Psychology
Selected interdisciplinary topics in Psychology. Topics may vary.
712
Research in Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Completion of a research project in Brain and/or Cognitive Sciences conducted under the supervision of a faculty member. Topics may vary.
713
Research in Social and Theoretical Psychology
Completion of a research project in the areas of Social and/or Theoretical Psychology conducted under the supervision of a faculty member. Topics may vary.
720
Seminar in Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Selected topics in Brain and/or Cognitive Sciences. Topics may vary.
730
Seminar in Social and Theoretical Psychology
Selected topics in Social and/or Theoretical Psychology. Topics may vary.
739
Seminar in Industrial/Organizational Psychology
Application of psychological principles and methods to business, industry and other organizational settings.
750
Advanced Seminar in Clinical Psychology

751
Special Topics in Adult Psychopathology
A specialized topic course in the area of adult psychopathology. Course offerings will vary from year-to-year and may include such topics as: schizophrenia, substance abuse, suicide, mental health delivery systems, or computer applications in clinical psychology.
760
Specialty Practicum in Clinical Psychology I
Supervised training experience in an approved clinical setting. Provides in-depth exposure to specific clinical populations and to the application of various psychological assessment and intervention strategies and techniques.
762
Specialty Practicum in Clinical Psychology II
Supervised training experience in an approved clinical setting. Provides advanced in-depth exposure to specific clinical populations and to the application of various psychological assessment and intervention strategies and techniques.
765
Practicum in Clinical Psychology
Supervised training experience in an approved clinical setting. Provides exposure to specific clinical populations and to the application of various psychological assessment and intervention strategies and techniques.
798
Pre-Doctoral Internship in Clinical Psychology
A full calendar year, full-time (or two-years, half-time) supervised training experience in an approved clinical setting. Intensive exposure to various professional issues, the opportunity to work with a diverse range of clinical populations and problems, and advanced training in the use of specific psychological assessment and intervention strategies.
Public Policy
12
601
Foundations I
This preparatory course covers the foundations necessary to understand and apply economic analysis and it covers selected topics relevant to the core courses listed below.
603
Foundations II
This preparatory course covers the foundations of basic empirical analysis, including quantitative and qualitative research methods.
605
Markets and Public Policy
The role of markets in the allocation of resources and the determination of income. Sources of market failure, and the appropriate public policy response to those failures, are examined. Students learn how private firms make decisions, and how they respond to policy initiatives.
607
Politics and Collective Choice
How public policy issues emerge and how they are developed, refined, and influenced by the political process. The roles and influences of NGOs, interest groups, the media, political parties, and social protest on the development of new public policies are examined from the perspective of several disciplines. The importance of agenda setting, management and planning, policy reform and the organizational resistance to change is examined. Models of rational actors and bureaucratic behaviour are explored.
609
Decision Analysis
The focus is on the foundations, applications and use of quantitative methods commonly used in decision making in the public and private sectors. Included are methods such as impact analysis, cost-benefit analysis, surveys, game theory and risk management tools.
611
Independent Study
Supervised individual study in a selected public policy area.
613
Effective Writing and Research Skills
Development of skills for writing high quality documents in a professional setting. Defining, designing and executing applied, policy-oriented research.
615
Public Finances
An overview of government finances and the restrictions on policy choices resulting from the need for governments to satisfy a budget constraint. Tax policy, the appropriate design of expenditure policies, policies with respect to deficits and debt, and issues of intergovernmental relations will be examined.
617
Regulation and the Law
The role of international and national legal institutions in determining public policy choices. Legal research and interpretation skills are developed through specific public policy issues such as the design of market regulation in telecommunications, energy and various utility markets.
619
Governance, Institutions and Public Policy
An examination of the rules and informal relationships among those determining public policy outcomes. Alternative institutional relationships and the evolution of those relationships are studied. The ever-changing dynamic of multi-level governance and court versus legislative public policy making are explored.
621
Communicating Policy
Examines all aspects of communication in the context of policy, including the impact of new modes of communication on the development and dissemination of public policy. The new role of blogs, online communities, and web-based media at marshalling and influencing public opinion and the changing role of print media are discussed and evaluated. Implications for copyright policies, media concentration, privacy, and advertising are among the issues examined.
623
Capstone Project
Students learn methods by which research contributes to the design and development of policy outcomes. Students are required to apply the skills they have learned to the completion of a capstone project which investigates a well-defined issue of public policy. The final product of the capstone project is expected to be a substantive, well-researched, focused and highly professional document. Work on the capstone project will be guided by a School of Public Policy faculty member and may include input provided by an expert from the private sector or public sector.
Real Estate Studies
14
317
Real Estate Development and Urbanization
Fundamentals of the real estate industry from bare land to built form, including land development and regulatory body approval acquisition. Exploration of the context of city building, including topics such as the conflict between use value and exchange value of land, political economy of space, globalization trends, sustainability, gentrification and social movements.
427
Real Estate Investment and Analysis
Introduction to the instruments, techniques, and institutions of real estate finance, sources of funds and mortgage risk analysis. Residential and commercial real estate contracting fundamentals are also covered. Examination of the risk and rewards when investing in and financing both commercial and residential real estate deals. Concepts include investment, financing, site analysis, appraisals, lending, and management of real estate portfolios and corporate real estate.
437
Land Development and Planning
Introduction to the urban planning process and what is required to gain government approvals for land development proposals, from small-scale redevelopment projects to large-scale complete new communities. Topics will include: an overview of planning legislation; municipal processes and timelines; the risks and costs associated with planning approvals; stakeholder engagement; developing political acumen; and new trends in managing growth and achieving sustainability goals.
447
Real Estate Legal and Operating Environment
Foundation of legal, regulatory and stakeholder issues affecting real estate. Topics include: real estate transactions, real estate brokerage, real property ownership interests, illegal discrimination in residential and commercial transactions, and other legal transactions involving real estate, such as sales and leases. Challenges within approvals processes based on government relations and stakeholder perceptions are also a focus.
457
Real Estate Marketing
Marketing is essential to the success of any real estate development project. In this course, students review the role that marketing plays at each step in the development process, gain an understanding of changing real estate markets, and learn how to utilize market research information, develop and manage a marketing program, create unique project identities, and undertake an effective advertising and communications program.
559
Selected Topics in Real Estate Studies
Investigation of selected topics in Real Estate Studies.
567
Project-Based Capstone
Application of classroom learnings to a project relevant to the real estate industry. Sectors may include: commercial developers, brokerage firms, residential developers (greenfield and infill), municipal government and consulting firms.
707
Fundamentals of Real Estate
Provides an overview of real estate development – from bare land to built form. Covers valuation, conflict between use and exchange value of land, market value/assessment, comparison of different sectors and business models, environmental/social considerations, and trends.
717
Real Estate Investment and Analysis
Structure and operations of the Canadian mortgage and asset-backed securities markets. Topics include instruments, techniques, and institutions of real estate finance, sources of funds, mortgage risk analysis, and fundamentals of residential and commercial real estate contracting. Examination of the risks and rewards when investing in and financing both commercial and residential real estate deals. Concepts include investment, financing, site analysis, appraisals, lending, and management of real estate portfolios and corporate real estate.
727
Land Development and Planning
Introduction to urban planning. Topics will include planning legislation, municipal processes and timelines, the risks and costs associated with planning approvals, stakeholder engagement, developing political acumen, and new trends in managing growth and achieving sustainability goals.
737
Legal and Operating Environment
Foundation of legal, regulatory and stakeholder issues affecting real estate. Topics will include real estate transactions, real estate brokerage, real property ownership interests, illegal discrimination in residential and commercial transactions, and other legal transactions involving real estate, such as sales and leases. Governance models, legislation, policies and by-laws in relation to the business of real estate and land development.
747
Real Estate Marketing
Coverage includes real estate marketing programs based on theoretical principles, an understanding of changing real estate markets, marketing methods, research approaches and marketing program development.
767
Advanced Real Estate Development
Includes market and financial analyses, development planning and design, presentations, and contact with key industry sources. May include site visits.
789
Selected Topics in Real Estate Studies
Investigation of selected topics in Real Estate Studies.
Religious Studies
87
200
Religious Myths and Worldviews
Readings (in English translation) from the classical literatures of middle Eastern and Asian religions. Introduction to the evolving mythological traditions from three geo-cultural centres (the middle East, India, and China) by examining religious themes: cosmology; existential values and goals; destinies of humans, the world, and the cosmos.
201
Jews, Christians and Muslims
Introduction to Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
203
Asian Religions
Introduction to Eastern religions such as Jainism, Hinduism, Sikhism, Buddhism, Confucianism and Taoism.
205
Religion and The Good Life
An introduction to the academic study of religion with particular emphasis on the nature of religion, its role as a response to existential questions, and the relationship of religion to contemporary thought and culture.
300
Classical Hebrew I
Classical or Biblical Hebrew language; the development of ability in the critical reading of ancient texts. No attempt will be made to provide any competence in medieval or modern Hebrew.
301
Studies in the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament
An introduction to the critical study and reading of the books of the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament in English translation. The course focuses on the Bible as religious literature.
302
Classical Hebrew II

303
Introduction to Hinduism
The history, textual traditions, schools and sectarian traditions of Hinduism.
305
Greek Religion
A survey of religious beliefs and practices in the pre-Christian Greek World.
307
Popular Hinduism
An introductory survey of the contemporary practices of Hinduism in South Asia and in diaspora Hindu communities throughout the world. Focusing on recent ethnographic research, the course examines the diversity of popular Hindu practices with special attention to differences defined by region, language, caste, and gender. Topics covered will include, but are not limited to, the structure of social and family life, the organization of sacred space and time, ritual practices, and the influence and impact of modernity in Hindu life.
309
Religious Experience
A study of philosophical and psychological theories of the nature and function of religious experiences and an introduction to a variety of religious experiences, which may include theophany, mysticism, enlightenment, conversion, and guilt.
310
Sanskrit I
Classical Sanskrit language; the development of ability in the critical reading of ancient Hindu or Buddhist texts.
312
Sanskrit II

313
Introduction to Buddhism
Buddhist developments from the time of Buddha to the development of Mahayana.
314
Tibetan I
Classical Tibetan language; the development of ability in the critical reading of ancient Bon and Buddhist texts.
316
Tibetan II

317
Religion in South Asia
An in-depth survey of the religious traditions of the Indian sub-continent. Special attention will be given to the long history of religious pluralism and recent communal conflicts in South Asia. The course will cover religious traditions that have come to South Asia from other parts of the world (primarily Islam, but also Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Christianity and Baha’i).
319
Esoteric Buddhism
The development of Vajrayana, Tantric and other esoteric traditions of Buddhism in India, Tibet, China, Japan and in the West from medieval times to the present.
320
Classical Chinese for Religious Texts I
Introduction to Classical Chinese language, with emphasis on developing the ability to read ancient Chinese religious texts.
322
Classical Chinese for Religious Texts II

323
Mahayana Buddhism
Mahayana developments in India, China, Tibet or Japan.
324
Zen Buddhism
An exploration of the thought and practice of Chan (Chinese) and Zen (Japanese) Buddhism, including twentieth-century developments in the west.
327
Tibetan Religious Traditions
The religious developments in Tibet, with emphasis on religious history, literature and philosophy and their contemporary implications.
329
Buddhism in East Asia
The history, doctrines, literature and leading figures of Buddhism in China and Japan.
331
Religious Perspectives on Suffering
An examination of various religious perspectives on the nature and causes of human suffering.
333
Religious Perspectives on Death and Afterlife
An examination of various religious perspectives on the nature of death and life after death.
335
Ritual and Religion
A major form of religious expression is the various practices and rituals performed by individuals and the community. Various ritual theories and approaches will be examined along with different examples of religious ritual expressions.
338
Atheism
A consideration of various historical and thematic critiques of religion, including the development of modern agnosticism, atheism and in recent times, the ‘new atheism’.
339
Transformations of Religion in Africa
Nature of religion through a study of religious transformations in Africa.
341
New Religious Movements
An examination of the beliefs, practices and developments of new religious movements of both Eastern and Western origins (e.g. Krishna Consciousness, Transcendental Meditation, Unification Church, Children of God, etc.).
343
Religion and Social Morality
Critical examination of social theories of religion and religious perspectives on ethical issues of social, economic, and political consequence in contemporary cultures.
344
The Bible as Literature
An exploration of the various literary genres that make up the sixty-six books of the Bible, understood as a compilation of human literature reflecting millennia of communal struggle, vision, and engaged reception.
345
God and Transcendence
Comparative and theoretical discussion of various traditions, Eastern and Western, regarding the object of religious belief and devotion.
346
Chaos, Demons and Monsters
An examination of religious depictions of supernatural evil agents and forces in the light of their role in the experience of good/evil, suffering/happiness, and existence/death.
348
Religion, Empire and Colonialism
An examination of the complex interplay of religious traditions and imperial projects. The development of religion in response to engagement with other cultures, religions and traditions brought on by colonialism, as well as the religious construction and categorization of these others, will be considered through comparative, historical, literary and/or thematic lenses. Modern responses to colonialism as well as discussions of multiculturalism and immigration may be discussed as they relate to religion.
349
Religion and Politics
A study of the complex relationship between religion and politics, including nationalism and political religions. Topics may include the origin of apartheid in South Africa, Black Theology, the rise of the New Christian Right in America, Hindu and Islamic political movements, and various forms of Fascism including the Nazi movement.
353
Islam in the Modern World
Reform, revivalist and sectarian movements and significant thinkers in Modern Islam.
357
Islam
A survey of the basic religious ideas, texts, figures, and practices in Islam, including their historical development.
359
East Asian Religious Traditions
The history, doctrines and literature of the major religious traditions of China, Korea and Japan.
360
Buddhist Practice Traditions
An introduction to different kinds of meditation practices in Buddhist traditions, through their historical trajectories and their related devotional and ritual aspects. The material is organized according to principal contemporary areas (Vipassana, Chan/Zen/Son, Pureland, Tibetan).
363
Cross-Cultural Philosophy of Religion
Comparative study of philosophical issues of religious interest arising from diverse cultures.
367
Comparative Studies in Western Religions
A comparative and critical examination of a specific topic within Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Possible topics include: Material Culture, Pilgrimage, and Scriptural Exegesis.
369
Introduction to Judaism
An introduction to the major practices, beliefs, institutions and religious literature of the Jewish religion, as developed from antiquity to modern times.
373
Topics in Religious Studies
Topics may include an overview of a specific religious tradition, an examination of religious expressions in a particular context, a thematic study of a religion or religions, or a methodological approach to the study of religion.
377
Research and Critical Inquiry in Religious Studies
Systematic instruction in research methods, academic writing, and the practice of critical analysis in the field of Religious Studies. Besides practical instruction, students will be introduced to a variety of methods and theories used in the academic study of religion.
381
Gender, Sex and Religion
An examination of the complex interrelationship between understandings and constructions of gender, sexuality and Religion as they arise in the context of several religious traditions.
383
From Jesus to Christ
The study of formative Christianity up to 200 CE in its political, social and religious contexts.
385
Pagans and Christians
Examination of the evolution of ancient ‘pagan’ (Greek and Roman non-Christian) and early Christian religions from 200-800 CE, exploring their similarities, differences, and interactions, and situating them in their social, economic, cultural, and political context.
387
Christian Monks, Mystics and Reformers
An overview of medieval Christian monasticism and mysticism, including female mystics such as Margery Kempe and Julian of Norwich, as well as humanists such as Erasmus, and early modern Protestant and Catholic Reformers.
389
Christian Responses to Modernity
Examines various Christian responses to modernity from 1600 CE, including German Pietism, English Puritanism, John Wesley and early Evangelicalism, Protestant Liberalism, Vatican II and modern Roman Catholicism, Liberation Theology, and inter-religious dialogue.
397
Religion and Science
The relationship between religion and science with emphasis on contemporary discussions regarding the intersection of religious thought and theories in the natural sciences.
398
Religion and the Environment
Consideration of issues of public environmental concern from the perspectives of religious studies and ethics. Possible topics include climate change, water depletion, environmental pollution, animal stresses, species/ecosystem decimation, and the climate refugee problem.
399
Religion in Popular Culture
The intersection of religion with popular culture is explored through specific topics.
417
Recent Religious Thought
Detailed examination of a selected writer, topic, or intellectual current in recent religious thought.
437
Hermeneutics
Significance of the hermeneutical tradition for an understanding of religious issues and traditions with attention to the thought of Schleiermacher, Dilthey, Husserl, Heidegger, Gadamer, and Ricoeur among others.
439
Advanced Studies in New Religious Movements
Detailed study of selected topics in New Religious Movements.
440
Religion and Economic Systems
A consideration of the relationship between religious practices and systems of exchange, credit, and economic rationalization. Historical documents will be used to illustrate the complex nature of religion and economics.
444
Existentialism
An examination of existentialist thinkers from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, contextualizing their work within both modernity and theist/atheist discourses.
445
Advanced Studies in Asian Thought
A critical examination of Asian philosophical and religious thinkers.
447
Theories of Religion
A critical examination of various theories used in the academic study of religion.
451
Advanced Studies in Hinduism
In-depth study of the historical developments of Hinduism (Vedic, Classical, Medieval, Modern) in a seminar or independent study format.
453
Advanced Studies in Buddhism
A seminar course that focuses on selected traditions, or philosophical or historical themes, such as Madhyamaka, Yogacara, T'ien T'ai, Hua Yen, Zen, Pure Land, Nyingma, Kargyud, Abhidharma, Tathagatagarbha, and Dhyana.
461
Advanced Studies in East Asian Religions
A seminar course that focuses on selected topics related to the Confucian, Daoist, Buddhist, or Shinto traditions in China, Korea and Japan.
463
Advanced Topics in Cross-Cultural Philosophy of Religion
Advanced comparative study of selected philosophical issues of religious interest arising from diverse cultures.
469
Advanced Studies in Judaism
Selected topics in Jewish practices, institutions, beliefs and religious literature. Possible topics include: Jewish Movements of the Second Temple Era; Jewish Rituals and Observances; Midrash and Jewish Biblical Interpretation; Law and Religion in Judaism; Jewish Philosophy and Theology; Judaism in the Modern World; Kabbalah and Jewish Mysticism.
473
Advanced Studies in Islam
Thematic considerations of topics, such as Islamic philosophy, mysticism, theology, or contemporary trends, based on primary sources. Although no knowledge of Arabic is required, students with backgrounds in Arabic will have the option of working with texts in their original languages.
474
Advanced Topics in Religious Studies
Topics may include an overview of a specific religious tradition, an examination of religious expressions in a particular context, a thematic study of a religion or religions, or a methodological approach to the study of religion.
477
Further Studies in the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament
Selected readings, in English translation, from the three major divisions (Pentateuch, Prophets, and Writings) of the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament. Covers topics such as creation, miracles in Egypt, ark of the covenant, sacrifice, prophecies of the Bible, and biblical views of death and immortality.
479
Contemporary Issues in Women and Religion
A topical examination of developments in current research in such areas as: gender theory, post-colonialism, philosophy and religion, feminist theology, feminist evaluation of traditional religious structures, or interdisciplinary work in the reconstruction of women's religiosity.
484
Advanced Studies in Christianity

491
Reading Religious Texts in Primary Languages
Study of religious texts in original languages such as Hebrew, Sanskrit, Tibetan, Chinese or Japanese.
577
Senior Project Seminar
Students will complete an independent research project on a topic within their area of concentration in Religious Studies and present their research in a seminar setting.
590
Honours Thesis
Students compose a major research paper under the close supervision of a member of the Department and defend the thesis before an examining committee.
595
Directed Independent Study
Advanced study of a particular topic under the direction of a faculty member. Qualified students will be supervised through a session of independent study.
601
Studies in Western Religions

603
Studies in Eastern Religions

605
Studies in the Nature of Religion

607
Supervised Master's Thesis Inquiry

609
Selected Topics on Critical Discourses in the Study of Religion
Selected topics on critical discourses in the study of religion.
681
Specialized Studies in Western Religions

683
Specialized Studies in Eastern Religions

685
Specialized Studies in the Nature of Religion

701
Studies in Western Religions

703
Studies in Eastern Religions

705
Studies in the Nature of Religion

707
PhD Departmental Colloquium

709
Advanced Topics on Critical Discourses in the Study of Religion
Advanced topics on critical discourses in the study of religion.
Risk Management and Insurance
7
317
Introduction to Risk Management and Insurance
Introduction to, and an understanding of, risk management and insurance as they pertain to both personal and business situations, with an emphasis on personal risk management. Includes a survey of risk management and insurance principles and focuses on risk assessment, property-liability insurance, employee benefits, retirement, and life and health insurance.
439
Protecting your Family and Wealth
Examines the role that life and health insurance plays in securing individuals' financial futures, whether ensuring family security, or preserving the value produced by the time and energy spent building a business. Topics include wealth transfer to the next generation as well as protection of income and assets. The best fit for different types of policies available at different stages in life will also be examined.
449
Employee Benefits and Social Insurance
Employee benefits are a major component of a firm's compensation package. This course examines employer and employee objectives for benefit plans; government programs around which employer-sponsored plans must be designed, design and administration of benefits programs (including group life insurance, group health insurance, and pension plans), and how the employer and government-based benefits fit into an individual’s financial plan.
459
Managing Commercial Property and Liability Risks
Examines risk management for commercial property and liability exposures. The first half of the course focuses on common property loss exposures that firms face and examines methods of handling such risks. The second half focuses on liability exposures of commercial enterprises, including premises and operations liability, product liability, employment practices liability and director's and officers' liability.
559
Selected Topics in Risk Management and Insurance
Combines a fundamental understanding of insurance and risk management with current issues confronting the insurance industry and risk managers.
579
Advanced Topics in Risk Management and Insurance
A study of the various methods used to finance the operational risks of commercial enterprises. Key topics addressed are: loss forecasting, insurance, alternative risk financing, reinsurance and environmental risk management.
763
Managing Risks and Disasters
Risk management strategies with emphasis on the management of operational and hazard risks. Topics include risk identification and assessment; organizational responsibility for risk management; risk mitigation; risk financing; crisis management, and business continuity planning.
Romance Studies
4
299
Romance Culture
Study of Mediterranean cultures: France, Italy and Spain.
341
Italian Literature of the Renaissance
Major authors of the Italian Renaissance whose works have influenced artists and writers in England, France and Spain.
399
Topics in Romance Languages

499
Advanced Topics in Language and Culture
Discussion of selected topics dealing with Romance languages, literatures and cultures.
Russian
22
201
Introductory Russian I
Introduction to Russian in its cultural context. Four-skills language learning (reading, listening, speaking, writing) covering the principal elements of modern Russian. Focuses on Russian pronunciation and intonation, the Cyrillic alphabet, the foundations of Russian grammar, as well as basic vocabulary.
209
Introductory Russian II
A further introduction to the basics of the Russian language, including its differences from and similarities to English, within the cultural and historical context. Structured according to various aspects of everyday life, such as family, university, professions, etc.
301
Continuing Russian I
Furthers acquisition of the basic level of the language, enabling function in a variety of everyday situations by building comprehensive knowledge of grammar, expanding active vocabulary, and providing cultural information.
303
Continuing Russian II
Further strengthens knowledge of the basics of the language enabling advancement to a more advanced stage of language mastery.
309
Russian Urban Culture in Immersion Setting
Introduction to contemporary urban Russian culture through research projects and life experience.
311
Russian Rural Culture in Immersion Setting
Introduction to contemporary rural Russian culture through research projects and life experience.
313
Russian Language in Immersion Setting
Further development of oral skills and writing proficiency.
317
Topics in Russian Civilization and Thought
Distinctive features in the development of Russian civilization and thought.
331
Intermediate Russian I
Strategies for accelerated proficiencies in the areas of vocabulary, the deciphering of written and oral texts and the relating of learned linguistic patterns to communi­cative contexts, with attention to appropriate discourse level in a variety of situations.
333
Intermediate Russian II

355
Russian Literature in Translation
Selected texts by author, genre or period designed to explore issues of significance in the context of Russian culture.
360
Russian Literature of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries
Overview of Russian literature of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in a historical perspective, with attention to issues of particular significance in Russian literary culture. Initial experience of literary analysis on the basis of diverse Russian texts.
363
Current Issues in Russian Culture
Selected significant issues in Russian culture, as manifested in written and/or oral texts, with particular attention to language function and usage.
397
Inter-Cultural Immersion Experience I
Independent study course. Project with inter-cultural theme, derived from an immersion experience, most likely abroad.
400
Topics in Advanced Russian
Provides diverse contexts and relies on various media and techniques to generate active and sophisticated usage of the language. Equips students with skills and strategies for independent language learning.
451
Cross-Cultural Explorations
Cross-cultural comparison of events, cultural patterns, historical periods, or social movements which find a parallel in more than one of the cultural traditions represented in the School of Languages, Linguistics, Literatures and Cultures.
461
Topics in Russian Literature

463
Topics in Russian Language and Culture from a Historical Perspective
Concentration on a linguistic and/or cultural topic in its historical development.
497
Inter-Cultural Immersion Experience II
Independent study course. Project with inter-cultural theme, derived from an immersion experience at an advanced level, most likely abroad.
551
Independent Study
An independent research project on a topic that is not normally a part of the program's course offerings.
561
Research Seminar
Centred on a professor's current research project, the course will engage senior students as members of a collaborative research team. Independent research, discussion, group presentations, dissemination of results in an appropriate venue.
591
Honours Project
A research paper or creative project for honours students in their final year on a topic chosen in consultation with their supervisor.
School of Creative and Performing Arts
9
290
History and the Performing Arts
The history of dance, drama and music through an interarts lens, focusing on works and ideas across time periods and art forms.
399
Approaching Interdisciplinarity
An introduction to the challenges and opportunities of interdisciplinary exchange and collaboration in the arts.
401
Performing Arts Management
Introduction to politics, strategies, and practices of marketing and fundraising as they apply to non-profit performing arts companies.
499
Interdisciplinary Praxis
Intermediate development of theory and practice of interdisciplinary exchange and collaboration in the arts.
501
Topics in Inter-Arts Collaborations
Experiential or lecture-based work that crosses the disciplinary boundaries of Dance, Drama and Music.
503
Travel Study
An international perspective on performance and culture that crosses the disciplinary boundaries of Dance, Drama and Music.
599
Interdisciplinary Creation
Advanced development of creative inquiry and practice through interdisciplinary exchange and collaboration in the arts.
601
Topics in Inter-Arts Collaborations
Experiential or lecture-based work that crosses the disciplinary boundaries of Dance, Drama and Music.
603
Travel Study
An international perspective on performance and culture that crosses the disciplinary boundaries of Dance, Drama and Music.
Science
18
301
Research Design and Statistical Analysis
A focus on the management, analysis, interpretation and communication of research results. Students will also examine and critique research design using examples from the primary literature in a multidisciplinary context.
311
Writing and Reviewing Scientific Reports
Elements of writing and reviewing scientific reports, use and enhancement of library skills, ethical principles of reviewing reports, and exposure to the literature of science. Papers and reviews will be transmitted electronically.
317
Energy Transformations
Discusses the heat engines that harness fuels to power the developed world. Includes where energy comes from and how that energy is converted into useful forms for transmission, distribution and use; informed by an overview of thermodynamics.
331
Scientific Explorations
Students will develop a well-rounded perspective and appreciation of science by investigating the nature of scientific inquiry and critically assessing key historical and contemporary achievements in science.
403
Science in Society
Exploration of the interaction among science and non-science areas in various ways including by written and oral presentations.
421
Fundamentals of Nuclear Energy Production
The science behind nuclear energy production including nuclear reactions, reactor design, waste disposal and historical and proposed accidents.
423
Fundamentals of Fuel Cells
Study of science and technology of next generation alternative energy conversion and storage technologies. Includes fundamental aspects of fuel cells, basic electrochemistry, classification of fuel cells, fuel cell performance curves, thermodynamics and kinetics of fuel cells, reforming, electrodes and electrolytes. Understanding the chemical and physical property relationships of fuel cell materials.
427
Principles of Solar Power
Discusses solar power in its various forms, including photovoltaics and solar thermal technologies.
431
Principles of Hydroelectric Energy
An introduction to the scientific fundamentals of hydroelectric energy production. Includes an examination of the technologies and potential for developing hydroelectricity, along with the environmental, societal, and economic issues surrounding its development.
433
Principles of Geothermal Energy
The scientific principles governing geothermal energy development for both low and high temperature systems, and related technical, environmental and socioeconomic issues.
501
Project Course in Natural Sciences
Intended to achieve integration and interdisciplinarity within the Natural Sciences program.
502
Research Project in Natural Sciences
A comprehensive research project under the direction of staff member(s) in the Faculty of Science. Research projects may be disciplinary or interdisciplinary in nature. Interdisciplinary projects may involve more than one Science discipline or a Science discipline combined with a non-Science discipline.
507
Experiential Learning in Science - Special Topics
Lectures, seminars, tutorials and/or research project leading to a focused examination of a topic from interdisciplinary perspective.
510
Field Placement
Students spend one term as an intern in a government, non-profit or private-sector organization under the auspices of an agency or organization that has a Co-operation Agreement with the University of Calgary.
511
Peer Mentoring and Collaborative Learning in Science
Students (peer mentors) gain theoretical knowledge of peer mentoring, practical facilitation instruction and experience to support peers in their learning. Grounded knowledge of science-based learning theories, peer mentors will encourage and motivate learning, convey enthusiasm for course material, and provide support for active learning in and out of the classroom.
529
Project Course in Sustainable Energy, Environment and Economy
Intended to achieve integration across the interdisciplinary energy, environment and economy programs.
601
Theory and Practice of University Teaching and Learning in STEM
Current educational theory and practice relating to university teaching and learning in STEM will be explored and critically evaluated. Students will critically evaluate their teaching beliefs and broaden their knowledge and skills through a combination of discussion, microteaching opportunities and a capstone project involving the design of a teaching unit.
603
STEM Teaching Development
Design and delivery of a unit of a course within the student’s area of specialization and under the guidance of a faculty member. Course and curriculum design elements are emphasized through the production of a detailed lesson plan, strategy for assessment and evaluation of the success of the teaching unit. The importance of reflective practice and mentorship to the teaching function is stressed through reflective essays and group discussions. Experiences will be shared through a symposium poster presentation.
Slavic
1
356
Perspectives on Eastern Europe
Selected significant current issues in East-European cultures through the lens of literature, visual arts, drama, music, and film.
Social Work
81
201
Introduction to Social Work
Provides an overview of the profession of social work and the social policy context within which it is practiced.
300
Generalist Practice in Context Theme Course
Examination of the professional use of self in relation to the knowledge, values, and skills pertaining to the practice of generalist social work practice in rural, remote, and Aboriginal communities.
301
Generalist Practice in Context Portfolio Project
Individual preparation of a self-directed portfolio as an expression of the student’s own understanding of generalist social work practice in relation to the local context. The student’s prior learning experiences will be incorporated in the development of the project.
302
Research in Context Theme Course
An introduction to knowledge generation relevant to generalist social work practice. Foundational concepts and approaches of various research methodologies will be introduced as ways of knowledge building to inform practice and influence policy, particularly within rural, remote and Indigenous contexts.
303
Practice With Individuals in Context
Focuses on interviewing and counselling skills from a generalist social work perspective. Emphasis will be given to skill development, critical reflection, practice evaluation, and practical application within rural, remote and Indigenous contexts.
304
Diversity and Oppression Theme Course
Examines diversity, colonization, oppression, and intergroup relations associated with the practice of social work in rural, remote, and Indigenous communities. Anti-oppressive frameworks will be introduced for understanding the processes associated with social justice.
305
Diversity and Oppression Portfolio Project
Individual preparation of a self-directed portfolio as an expression of the student’s own critical analysis of diversity, oppression, and social justice in relation to the local context. Honouring the student’s prior learning experiences by acknowledging and incorporating aspects of that learning in the development of the project.
306
Social Work Methods Course
Examines various perspectives and theoretical approaches relating to the development, maintenance, and application of empowering relationships in generalist social work practice. Particular emphasis will be placed on local applications in rural, remote, and Indigenous organizations and communities.
307
Practice Skills in Context
Focuses on theory and practice relating to social work with individuals, families and groups in diverse communities. Particular emphasis will be paid to skill development, critical analysis and practical application within rural, remote and Indigenous contexts.
355
Research in Context
An introduction to basic research methodology, data analysis and a critical appraisal and application of research findings within a reflective model of practice.
361
Professional Use of Self
Focuses on the examination and integration of theoretical and practical understandings of professional social work practice. Topics covered include: critical thinking; ethical decision-making; knowledge of the associations to which social work professionals belong; professional writing; and self-care.
363
Human Development and Environments
Explores the nature of human behaviour and development in diverse environments and contexts (personal, community, social, and environmental) and explores the implications for social work practice and theory.
365
Critical Approaches to Social Work Practice
Provides theoretical frameworks, including anti-oppressive social work concepts, as a foundation for reflective professional generalist social work.
371
Social Work and Diversity
Students will critically examine the issues of diversity and the power relations that form common links among the experiences of oppression and marginalization in Canadian society.
383
Social Policy and Social Justice
Provides an understanding of Canadian social policy, its impact on social justice and how it influences social work practice.
391
Practice and Evaluation with Individuals
An introduction to theories and skills for communicating with people in a professional social work context. Generic interviewing and basic counselling skills from a generalist perspective of social work practice will be developed.
393
Practice and Evaluation with Families
An introduction to theories and skills for family-centred social work practice with families. There will be an emphasis on diversity in relation to family development issues, the stresses families face, family assessment techniques, and theories and practices of family intervention.
395
Practice and Evaluation with Groups
An introduction to theories and skills for working with groups within a context of practice and assessment frameworks.
397
Practice and Evaluation with Communities
An introduction to theories and skills about community practice. The focus will be on understanding the basic values, and ethical, strategic, evaluative and political issues involved in working for community change.
399
Practice and Evaluation with Organizations
An introduction to theories and skills in the study of human service organizations. Examines organizational dynamics and how these impacts professional practice, relationships with clients, and the potential for organizational change.
410
Practicum I
Application of conceptual framework, experience, knowledge and skills within a specific practice setting.
411
Integrative Seminar I
Integration of theory and practice within the context of the field practicum.
412
Practicum II
Application of professional theory and skills in supervised social work practice settings.
413
Integrative Seminar II
Advanced integration of concepts, perspectives, theories and skills with practicum experiences, developing conceptual frameworks of practice.
551
Selected Topics: Social Work Interventions
Focuses on theory and practice related to social work interventions.
553
Selected Topics: Fields of Practice
Examines contexts, theories, practice models and skill development in specialized fields of practice.
555
Selected Topics: Practice with Selected Populations
Explores contexts, theories and practice models in working with specific populations.
557
Selected Topics: Contexts for Practice
Examines social work practice in specific contexts.
600
Social Justice and Theory in Advanced Social Work Practice
Examines concepts of culture, identity, oppression and "differentness" in relationship to theories of social justice, at all levels of professional practice.
602
Research and Philosophy in Advanced Social Work Practice
Explores social work research through examination of various approaches (qualitative and quantitative), paradigms, and methods and applies social work research to theories as students develop their professional practice model.
604
Advanced Practice Theories in Context
Examines theoretical models, philosophical frameworks and ethical foundations of social work practice as a means to facilitate change while locating social work’s development and current practice in historical, economic, political, social and cultural contexts.
606
Advanced Policy Practice in Context
Explores the influences of public policy on the lives, relationships, and well-being of individuals, families, groups and communities, while examining the relationship between social justice in the policy-making process and the role of social workers in shaping policy.
610
Advanced Topics in Clinical Social Work I
Examines multiple social work theories, models, and approaches to clinical practice. Clinical social work practice is situated within in historical, economic, political, social and cultural contexts. Critical perspectives, contemporary issues and research debates are discussed.
612
Advanced Topics in Clinical Practice and Research I
Application of evidence-based and anti-oppression modalities and best practices towards supporting and helping individuals, groups, families and communities.
614
Advanced Topics in Clinical Social Work II
Examines issues in clinical practice with diverse populations, including Indigenous, Francophone and newcomer populations. Specific treatment modalities and techniques are examined in depth.
616
Advanced Topics in Clinical Practice and Research II
Considers complicating factors in applying best, promising and ethical practices and techniques in clinical practice with diverse populations. Students will advocate for the needs of diverse and specific populations, including Indigenous Canadians and other minorities. Students will develop and use self-care practice.
620
Advanced Topics in International and Community Development I
Examines the role of social work and social workers in international and community development work at home and abroad. Theoretical foundations are examined alongside global influences in relation to historical, economic, political, social and cultural contexts. Critical perspectives, contemporary issues and research debates in social development, internationalization and globalization are discussed.
621
History and Foundation of the Profession
An examination of the relationship between knowledge, values, ethics and power and how they shape interventions in social work.
622
Advanced Topics in Practice and Research in International and Community Development I
Application of theories and concepts of international social work and community development to practice, with a focus on promoting change and challenging structured inequalities. Development of skills, strategies and tools for engaging in international social work and community development in international and North American settings.
624
Advanced Topics in International and Community Development II
Examination of various approaches, strategies, and perspectives for taking action as a social worker in international and community development settings, and growing a professional toolkit of resources and techniques to engage in this work.
625
Practice with Individuals, Families and Groups
A basic understanding of social work practice theory with respect to work with individuals, families and groups.
626
Advanced Topics in Practice and Research in International and Community Development II
Designing, creating and evaluating international and community development projects that integrate theory, research, and best practices. Development of greater self-awareness of the role, values, and skills of a social worker engaging in international and community development work.
627
Practice with Organizations and Communities
A basic understanding of social work practice theory with respect to work with organizations and communities.
629
Professional Communication and Interviewing
Offers experiential learning aimed at developing basic professional competencies and practice skills along with critical self-reflection.
632
Social Policy and Social Justice
An exploration of the social, political and economic forces, social movements and social structures that are transforming the Canadian welfare state and the practice of social work.
633
Foundational Field Practicum
Direct and indirect social work practice opportunities with professional supervision.
637
Human Behaviour in the Environment
Human development and diversity within a social work context.
640
Advanced Topics in Leadership in the Human Services I
Examines multiple theories, models and approaches of leadership in the human services. The historical, political, economic, social, and cultural influences impacting human service organizations are examined. Critical perspectives, contemporary issues, and research debates are discussed.
641
Models of Practice
Provides the conceptual and theoretical foundation for students to acquire the skills to practice in Social Work.
642
Advanced Topics in Practice and Research in Leadership in the Human Services I
Integrates leadership theories, models, and approaches in organizational and community practice. Applies evidence-based tools and strategies in assessment, evaluation, intervention, innovation, evaluation, change, and collaboration to develop a professional model of leadership.
644
Advanced Topics in Leadership in the Human Services II
Examines issues of diversity, culture, power and oppression in organizational and community practice. The changing roles of leadership in complex systems and changing contexts will be examined. Explores the influences of policy on the human service organization and the practice of leadership in this setting.
645
Issues in Social Work Research
An overview of social work research topics and issues.
646
Advanced Practice and Research in Leadership in the Human Services II
Enhances skills in facilitation, building trust, managing conflict, and fostering relationships in working with individuals, groups and communities. Integration of practice-based research to inform best practices, policy development and social change.
651
Policy as Context for Clinical Work
Policies and their impacts on the delivery of clinical work will be examined.
653
Comparative Approaches to Change
Various clinical change applications will be examined and critiqued.
655
Thesis Research
An introduction to preparing a thesis proposal.
657
Clinical Social Work Applications
Specific issues involved in the effective application of clinical approaches will be studied.
659
Evidence and Clinical Practice
Research as utilized in the clinical arena will be the focus of this course.
660
Advanced Practicum
Direct and indirect Social Work practice opportunities with professional supervision in student's area of specialization.
662
Integrative Seminar
Integration of theory, research applications/evaluation and professional practice in the student's area of specialization; and preparation of a capstone exit requirement.
665
Influencing Policy Development
Focuses on leadership in policy practice and in particular policy advocacy at all levels of policy (i.e., organizational, community, and provincial or national levels).
667
Leadership Theories in Action
Directed toward helping prepare leaders for “best practice” across the range of sectors and roles in which human service leaders work.
669
Leading Organizations and Communities
A practical course that will emphasize networked and collaborative approaches to leadership in a global context.
671
Social Policy
Explores social welfare policy in Canada and in a globalizing world, the current roles of social welfare policy, and the roles they should have.
673
International Social Development
Examines issues in international social development. There will be an emphasis on analysis of the social forces and conditions giving rise to different models of social development, and on what each of these alternative models tends to produce in terms of social welfare policies and programs.
675
Advanced International Social Work Modules
This set of modules will give students tools for social change.
677
Social Work Research for International and Community Methods
International and Community Development Research is designed to provide methodological knowledge and skills specifically oriented to community-based practice abroad or in Canada.
679
Special Topics Seminar I
Selected topics related to area of specialization or interest.
682
Special Seminar II
Selected topics related to an area of specialization or interest.
693
Research as a Foundation for Leadership
This course will provide students with a working understanding for the study and nature of the theoretical and practical issues underlying the application of the research process to professional and leadership practice.
695
Becoming an Evidence-Based Leader
Extends students’ abilities to identify, assess, and utilize research knowledge as a problem-solving tool in social work.
696
Advanced Practicum
Direct and indirect Social Work practice opportunities with professional supervision in student's area of specialization or interest.
697
Diversity, Oppression and Social Justice
Critical examination of the issues of diversity and the power relations that form common links among the experiences of oppression and marginalization in Canadian society.
699
Special Topics Seminar II
Advanced selected topics related to area of specialization or interest.
721
Integrative Research Colloquia
A concluding course offered as final component of student's course work. Allows doctoral students and the instructor to engage in a series of research colloquia, thereby facilitating critical analysis, feedback and synthesis of materials covered and skills learned in other course work. This process will help students to develop conceptual and methodological skills.
741
Research Foundations: Epistemology and Professional Knowledge-Building
An exploration of major philosophical issues that have shaped social work's diverse approaches to knowledge building and research methods. The relevance of this exploration to the student's area of interest is emphasized.
743
Theory, History and Philosophy: Values, Ethics and Professional Beliefs
An exploration of the philosophical and ideological issues that have been historically important to the profession with respect to its conception of its ethics, mandate and practices. The relevance of this exploration to the student's area of interest in emphasized.
745
Research Methods I: Quantitative
Quantitative methodological and design options in social work research.
747
Research Methods II: Qualitative
Qualitative methodological and design options in social work research.
749
Quantitative Data Analysis
Statistical analysis of quantitative data.
799
Special Topics Seminar
Advanced selected topics related to the PhD focus area.
Sociology
71
201
Introductory Sociology
Sociology as a discipline examines how the society in which we live influences our thinking and behaviour. An introduction to sociology through the study of society, social institutions, group behaviour and social change.
301
Topics in Sociology
A variety of sociological topics are explored at an introductory level.
303
Sociology of Gender
A sociological exploration of the way genders are constructed and how they play-out at the level of individuals and institutions, and in diverse social contexts.
307
Sociology of Indigenous People in Canada
The dynamics of Indigenous groups' relations with each other and the larger society. Topics include decolonization and relations with the state, demography, Indigenous organizations, Indigenous nationalism and nation-building, power, social class and public policy.
309
Alberta Society
Sociological introduction to the ideology, composition, dynamics, and institutions of Albertan society, using external comparisons where relevant.
311
Introductory Social Statistics I
Univariate and bivariate statistics for survey data. Topics include cross tabular analysis, the normal distribution, confidence intervals for means, hypothesis testing, Chi-squared and F distributions and bivariate linear regression analysis. In labs statistical software to analyze survey data will be used.
313
Introductory Social Research Methods
Research processes including problem definition, data collection and analyses; quantitative and qualitative strategies.
315
Introductory Social Statistics II
Multivariate statistics for survey data; and measurement issues in quantitative research. Topics include reliability, multivariate tabular analysis, multiple regression, dummy variable regression, statistical interaction and path analysis. In labs statistical software to test measurement and causal models will be used.
321
Sociology of Health and Illness
Introduction to social factors influencing health, illness, and medicine. Topics covered may include the organization of medical institutions and occupations, the socialization of medical professionals, the social construction of illness, social determinants of health, and comparative health-care systems and policy.
325
Introduction to Deviance and Social Control
The presentation and analysis of theories of criminality and of non-criminal deviance, methods to uncover the incidence of deviance and criminality, a survey of forms of deviant and criminal behaviours, and the social and institutional responses to them.
327
Introduction to Criminal Justice
Introduction to the field of criminal justice in Canada from a sociological perspective. May include: examination of the definitions of crime; crime measurement; institutional responses to crime by the police, the courts and correctional services; and alternatives to the justice model.
331
Classical Sociological Theory
The development of sociological theory from the nineteenth century to the Second World War.
333
Contemporary Sociological Theory
The development of sociological theory from the Second World War to the present.
341
Social Psychology
A wide range of interdependent individual and social topics that influence our thinking, feeling, and behaviour. Topics may include social cognition, perception, social experience, group behaviour, social interaction, and emotions.
345
Mass Communication
A critical, theoretically-informed look at what it means to live in a society in which the forms and content of mass media/mass communication – and our uses of them – shape our lives in significant ways.
353
Urban Sociology
Discusses the impact of urbanization on social relationships by analyzing city living in historical and global perspective but also through local issues such as density and neighbourhoods.  Provides a sociological perspective on issues that cities are facing today.
355
Population and Society
Introduction to social demography – the study of population structure (size, composition and distribution) and processes (fertility, mortality and migration). Focuses on both empirical and theoretical relationships between demography, social change and structured inequality.
365
Social Stratification
Introduction to the sociological study of social inequalities and stratification and the major theoretical explanations of social inequalities.
371
Sociology of Families
A sociological examination of family life in all its multiple and changing forms. Topics may include key transitions and common practices in family life; gender, sexuality and family life, and family life in cross-cultural context.
373
Sociology of Aging
Social and institutional factors associated with aging in modern society.
375
Sociology of Ethnicity and Racialization
Introduction to the forms of ethnic and racial dynamics in selected cases around the world. Such concepts as identity, ethnicity, race, racialization, racism, assimilation, integration, pluralism, colonialism, post-colonialism, transnationalism and diasporas are examined in theoretical and cross-national contexts.
377
Sociology of Religion
An introduction to the theories and concepts utilized by sociologists to interpret religious behaviour and the organization of religion.
393
Sociology of Work
A sociological perspective for gaining a better understanding of the meaning and nature of work. Provides an overview of core concepts and current topics fundamental to understanding work in society.
399
Sociology of Sport
Organized around the theme of social problems in sport, examines sports-related behaviour, consumption, and sponsorship. A variety of approaches shows how sport is socially constructed and embodies different meanings for different groups of people.
401
Advanced Topics in Sociology
A variety of specialized sociological topics are explored at an advanced level.
403
Topics in Gender Relations
Selected themes and issues in the sociology of gender relations. Topics such as illness, consumer society, environmental risk, compassion, homelessness, poverty and identity have recently been explored.
405
Topics in Canadian Social Structure
A macro-level examination of Canadian social structure including a socio-developmental analysis of selected Canadian institutions such as bilingualism, regionalism, multiculturalism, multinational corporations, and ethnic stratification. Critical examination of sociological models for the study of Canadian society.
407
Sociology of the Body
Considers aspects of the lived body and the body as object of social construction, modification, and regulation.
409
Social Determinants of Health
An advanced study of health in a social context. Examines the social determinants of health and illness outcomes along with their implications for public policies conducive to better health.
413
Qualitative Research Methods
Research methods such as participant observation, naturalistic observation, interviewing, non-reactive techniques, and life histories, and methodological issues such as gaining access to subjects, and issues pertaining to the ethics of research.
419
Topics in the Sociology of Health and Illness
Advanced analysis of selected themes and issues in the sociology of health and illness.
421
Topics in Deviance and Criminology
Advanced study of contemporary issues in the research in deviance and crime.
423
The Sociology of Youth Crime
Explanations of the criminal activities of young people including an assessment of treatment strategies and legal regimes developed in response to this behaviour.
425
The Sociology of Violence
An exploration of violence in a variety of situations and social institutions and more general patterns of victimization in contemporary society.
427
The Social Organization of Criminal Justice
Comparative social organization of the criminal justice system from a sociological perspective; special attention to and analysis of the structure of the Canadian criminal justice system.
429
The Sociology of Law
Sociological problems regarding the origin, impact and definition of law, dispute resolution, and the relationship between law and social change.
435
The Sociology of Knowledge
The study of knowledge as a social practice; theories of knowledge, representation and interpretation; practical knowledge in everyday life; the role of organized knowledge in social domains such as science, biomedicine, bureaucracy, social service administration and professional occupations.
443
Topics in Social Psychology
An advanced study of social processes and interactions of persons in groups with some methodological considerations.
445
Visual Sociology
Visual representation in contemporary society. Social Practices of making and using Visual images, such as photographs. The use of visual methods in sociological research.
453
Topics in Urban Sociology
Critical analysis of theories of urban institutional and ecological characteristics. Emphasis is on comparative data derived from a sample of world cities.
461
Worker Movements and Labour Unions
A social movement perspective on working class struggle and accommodation in capitalist societies. Historical and contemporary movements will be considered, with an emphasis on Canada.
467
Ethnic Relations in Canada
An introduction to the structure and form of ethnic (racial) group relations in Canada. Contemporary relations will be analyzed from a historical perspective.
471
Topics in the Sociology of Families
Selected themes and issues in the sociology of families.
475
Topics in Race and Ethnic Relations
Advanced analysis of selected themes and issues in race and ethnic relations within the framework of theory and research.
483
Topics in Social Inequalities and Social Justice
Advanced, critical analysis of the causes and consequences of dimensions of social stratification and patterned inequalities. Teaching and learning practices are organized around social justice principles, i.e. ensuring the representation of diverse voices and perspectives.
485
Topics in Social Theory
Exploration of selected themes in social theory to develop advanced knowledge of specific social theorists and schools of social theory.
487
Sociology of Development
A study of the process of change and modernization in the developing areas of the world.
493
Topics in the Sociology of Work
Selected themes and issues in the sociology of work. May include gender and work, families and work, and the sociology of organizations.
499
Field School/Seminar in Sociology
A variety of specialized topics explored through concentrated learning opportunities. May include urban issues, the self in society, settlement and immigration, and disorder and crime.
501
Directed Reading
Independent study of a variety of advanced topics under the supervision of a member of the department.
504
Integrative Seminar
Advanced topics in sociology to facilitate special research projects, especially community-engaged and/or group research.
590
Sociology Honours Thesis and Seminar
Students will conduct an independent research project under the direction of a supervisor. In the seminar, students will discuss and present their projects and other topics relevant to conducting research.
601
Seminar in Special Topics in Sociology
Arranged for various topics of Sociology on the basis of special interest and need.
602
Master's Seminar in Professional Sociology

603
Seminar in Sociology of Health and Illness

611
Social Statistics: The General Linear Model
Multiple regression with applications to sociological research, with topics such as regression diagnostics, categorical predictors, non-linear relationships, logistic regression, and testing of mediation and moderation.
613
Seminar in Quantitative Research Methods
Advanced study in the theory and practice of quantitative research methods. Topics may include the logic of causality, mixed methods designs, sampling, measurement, survey construction and implementation.
615
Seminar in Qualitative Research Methods
Advanced study in the theory and practice of qualitative research methods. Topics may include participant observation, in-depth interviews, narrative analysis, conversation and discourse analysis, autoethnography, archival research, and feminist research methods.
625
Seminar on Deviant Behaviour

631
Seminar in Sociological Theory

653
Seminar on Urban Sociology

667
Seminar on Ethnic Relations

671
Seminar on Families, Relationships, and Personal Life

677
Seminar in Sociology of Gender Relations

699
Special Topics in Sociology

701
Doctoral Seminar in Sociology
Seminar on selected topics. Consult Department for details.
702
Doctoral Seminar in Professional Sociology

705
Selected Topics in Advanced Methodological Issues

711
Selected Topics in Advanced Quantitative Methods

715
Selected Topics in Advanced Qualitative Methods

731
Doctoral Seminar in Sociological Theory

Software Engineering
29
300
Introduction to Software Engineering
Introduction to the development and evolution of software. Covers key conceptual foundations as well as key methods and techniques used in the different phases of the software lifecycle. Emphasis on both technical and soft skills needed for high quality software and software-based products developed in teams.
401
Software Architecture
Software architectures and design for non-functional software properties. Introduction to program comprehension skills including analysis of existing architectures.
437
Software Testing
Concepts, methods, techniques, processes, and tools for software testing.
438
Software Testing, Reliability, and Quality
Concepts, methods, techniques, processes, and tools for software testing. The principles, processes, and applications of software reliability and software quality assurance.
471
Software Requirements Engineering
Introduction to elicitation, modelling, expression and validation of the requirements. Techniques and methodologies for requirements engineering. Applications of requirements engineering to the management of the software development lifecycle.
499
Introductory Topics in Software Engineering
Special topics at an introductory level on software development methods, technologies, or tools.
501
Advanced Topics in Software Engineering
Special topics at an advanced level on software development methods, technologies, or tools.
511
Software Process and Project Management
Analysis of methods, tools, and techniques for software process improvement and software project management as an effort to achieve quality software products.
513
Web-Based Systems
An overview of software engineering methods and technologies for developing web-based software systems.
515
Agile Software Engineering
Investigation and application of agile software development practices.
521
Software Reliability and Software Quality
The principles, processes, and applications of software reliability and software quality assurance.
523
Formal Methods
Software specification, verification, and validation using a mathematically rigorous technique.
533
Software Performance Evaluation
Analyzing quality requirements of large-scale software. Performance analysis, testing, and tuning techniques. Evaluating software scalability. Capacity planning methodologies. Issues related to safety, security, and availability of software.
541
Fundamentals of Software Evolution and Reuse
Phenomena and approaches involved in the evolution and reuse of large-scale software, including design for modifiability and tool support. Strengths and weaknesses of industrially-current techniques as well as recent research results.
550
Engineering Large Scale Analytics Systems
Sources and characteristics of large scale data, i.e., "big data", large scale data analysis, benefits of large scale data analysis to various industry domains, programming paradigms and middleware technologies for scalable data analysis, algorithms that enable large scale data processing, application of large scale data algorithms in selected application domains, e.g., Web user behaviour analysis and text processing, analytics frameworks.
605
Industrial Topics in Software Engineering
A study of practical approaches of industrial relevance to students specializing in Software Engineering.
607
Special Topics in Software Engineering
A study of problems of particular interest to students specializing in Software Engineering.
609
Special Topics in Software Engineering
A study of problems of particular interest to students specializing in Software Engineering.
611
Requirements Engineering I
The elicitation, modelling, expression, and validation of requirements.
615
Agile Software Engineering
Investigation and application of agile software development practices.
622
Software Release Planning
Product release planning covers systematic methods, tools and techniques for defining the functionality of a sequence of product releases in incremental development. The planning and re-planning is established as a systematic process trying to optimize resources available towards the functionality most requested by customers and stakeholders.
627
Software Engineering Decision Support
Provides methodological foundations of software engineering decision-making and how to apply them to make better decisions about processes, products, and resources as well as for selection of tools and techniques.
629
Software Engineering Standards and Models
Formal description of algorithms for current software engineering standards and models. Trends and future development in software engineering standardization.
637
Dependability and Reliability of Software Systems
Principles of software dependability techniques, and techniques to improve and predict software reliability.
639
Advanced Software Testing
Advanced techniques, tools and concepts in software testing including: Agile testing, acceptance testing, GUI testing, test coverage analysis, automated testing, and new developments in testing research.
641
Software Evolution and Reuse
Phenomena and approaches involved in the evolution and reuse of large-scale software, including design for modifiability and tool support. Strengths and weaknesses of industrially-current techniques as well as recent research results.
643
Automated Software Engineering
Discusses the main techniques for automating software engineering tasks such as requirement analysis, design, development, and testing. The covered automation techniques are based on concepts from data science, search-based software engineering, and model-driven software engineering. Focuses on the fundamental techniques and algorithms in each category with examples.
652
Software Engineering Project
A project in either software development or software best practice and experience.
696
Agent-Based Software Engineering
Principles and practices of engineering agent-based software systems.
Software Engineering for Engineers
19
337
Programming Fundamentals for Software and Computer
Key features of the C programming language. Pointers, memory models and memory management. Manipulation of text files and binary files. Introduction to recursion. Introduction to a modern object-oriented language. Development of basic program design skills with small projects.
409
Principles of Software Development
A survey of software design and development topics for Engineering students. Topics include: key features of an object-oriented programming language, especially inheritance and polymorphism; elements of object-oriented design; programming and application of common data structures; strategies and tools for testing and debugging.
480
Principles of Software Design
Brief overview of typical software development lifecycles. Systematic methods for designing large-scale, quality software. Concepts such as abstraction, modularity, and software modelling will be covered. Designing for non-functional properties of software will be introduced. Emphasis on individual skills.
519
Special Topics in Software Engineering

545
Introduction to Virtual Reality
Introduce VR technologies. Emphasize on engineering methodologies of creating VR systems. Characterize VR systems, hardware and software, user 3D interaction, and VR applications and future.
592
Programming Fundamentals for Data Engineers
An introductory course in programming with an emphasis on data engineering. Topics include: Basic data structures and algorithms; Loops and iterations; Files and I/O, Functions, Classes, Modules, and Packages; Strings and text manipulation; Data wrangling; Network and Web programming; Data visualization.
593
Principles of Software Development I
A fundamental study of software design and development topics for Engineering students. Topics include: fundamental programming constructs; key features of an object-oriented programming language, especially inheritance and polymorphism, elements of object-oriented design; programming and application of common data structures; strategies and tools for testing and debugging.
594
Principles of Software Development II
A fundamental study of software design and development topics for Engineering students. Topics include: parallel programming; event-driven programming; database programming; socket programming, and the development of client-server architectures; software engineering best practices.
603
Modelling and Measurement of Software Performance
Performance-oriented review of computer systems; methodologies to evaluate software performance; fundamental performance laws; performance prediction using queuing network models; discrete event simulation of computer system performance, simulation input and output analysis; performance testing, monitoring and benchmarking; workload characterization; software performance engineering.
604
Theoretical Foundations of Software Engineering
Explores formal principles of software engineering based on the common recognition that software engineering is not constrained by any physical laws as we know. The transdisciplinary foundations of software engineering are presented from the facets of information, computing, mathematics, cognitive, and management sciences, software engineering philosophies; engineering, mathematical, computational, management science, cognitive informatics, computational intelligence foundations and approaches of software engineering. As a result, a coherent framework of software engineering theories is learnt.
606
Software Engineering Fundamentals
Methodological foundation of software development principles from requirements analysis to software design and architecture.
607
Software Design and Architecture I
A study of software design topics including: abstraction, modularity, design patterns, software modelling, architectural patterns.
608
Software Design and Architecture II
A study of topics related to architecting software systems: database design, methods and technologies for developing web-based software systems, and architecting systems for non-functional software properties.
609
Team Design Project in Software Engineering I
A team design project in either software development or software best practice and experience.
610
Team Design Project in Software Engineering II
A team design project in either software development or software best practice and experience.
611
Machine Learning for Software Engineers
Covers Machine Learning, which focuses on developing machine learning applications, specifically in the engineering domain. Covers basic techniques for supervised and unsupervised learning, with the emphasis on the applied aspects of the techniques.
612
Engineering Large Scale Data Analytics Systems
Sources and characteristics of large scale data, i.e., "big data", large scale data analysis, benefits of large scale data analysis to various industry domains, scalable data analysis frameworks, large scale data algorithms in selected application domains.
613
Software Requirements Analysis and Process Management
Introduction to software development process, product management, and software requirements analysis: Elicitation, modelling, and validation of requirements.
619
Special Topics
A study of problems of particular interest to students specializing in Software Engineering.
South Asian Studies
4
203
Understanding South Asia
The roots of ancient civilization; society, resources and environment; racial, ethnic and cultural diversities; philosophic and religious traditions; arts and aesthetics; historical bases of tradition and modernity; role of education in social development; ideological differences and economic development. Primary focus on India, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan and Nepal.
303
Contemporary Indian Society and Culture
This interdisciplinary course will discuss the culture and society of India today. Emphasis will be on casteism, communalism, religion, regionalism, globalization, ethnicity, class and gender in Indian society.
499
Topics in South Asian Studies

531
Supervised Research in South Asian Studies
An interdisciplinary, inquiry-based course in which students will pursue a supervised, independent research project on a topic from social, philosophical, economic, political and/or international issues within South Asia and analysis of the basis for interactions among South Asian countries and across the Pacific will be presented in-depth.
Space Physics
1
671
Physics of the Magnetosphere
Physics of the interaction between the earth's magnetic field and the fields and plasmas of the surrounding interplanetary environment. Topics include magnetic field models and co-ordinate systems, reconnection, current flow in the magnetosphere, substorms, and particle acceleration.
Spanish
48
201
Beginners' Spanish I
A comprehensive course for students with no prior knowledge of Spanish, focused on listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills having to do with immediate needs in everyday situations. Emphasis on intercultural awareness of Spanish-speaking cultures.
203
Beginners' Spanish II
Development of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills on familiar topics and topics of personal interest. Emphasis on intercultural awareness of Spanish-speaking cultures.
205
Intensive Spanish

301
Intermediate Spanish I
Advances the development of the three major modes of communication: interactional, interpretative, and presentational, with emphasis on intercultural understanding of Spanish-speaking cultures.
303
Intermediate Spanish II
Advances the development of the three major modes of communication: interactional, interpretative, and presentational, with emphasis on intercultural understanding of Spanish-speaking cultures, enabling communication on a variety of topics and comprehension and discussion of more complex texts and ideas.
321
Contemporary Hispanic Cultures
Study of current issues in the Hispanic world as seen through various media sources such as newspapers, magazines, television and especially the web. Introduction to tools and resources for such study. Extensive reading, written work and oral presentations.
323
Introduction to Textual Analysis and Composition
Focus on all forms of communication in Spanish, including journalistic, scientific, literary texts and other media, with emphasis on critical reading as well as analytical written assignments.
405
High-Intermediate Spanish
Development of reading skills through selected online materials or books. Increased emphasis on accurate pronunciation and ability to communicate in a more spontaneous Spanish as well as in written form. Review of selected grammatical structures, vocabulary enrichment and development of conversation skills dealing with cultural issues.
407
Critical Thinking in Spanish
Designed to develop students' critical thinking skills and academic writing proficiency. Further development of reading and writing skills, through the analysis of selected texts and constant practice in writing expository and argumentative essays from outline to completion. Writing is seen as a process that includes many states of development, revision and editing.
421
Introduction to Hispanic Prose
Analysis of selected Spanish and Spanish-American novels, short stories and essays, with an emphasis on literary analysis and literary history.
423
Introduction to Hispanic Poetry and Drama
Analysis of Spanish and/or Spanish-American poetry and plays, with an emphasis on literary analysis and literary history.
437
Spanish and Latin American Short Story
The analysis and interpretation of shorter fictional forms in Spain and Latin America, progressing from basic narrative techniques to the broad range of critical approaches to literary works. Strong emphasis will be placed on the understanding of the Hispanic cultures through literature and the development of critical thinking.
441
Women's Perspectives
Literary, artistic and other cultural works produced by Spanish, Latin American, Caribbean and Latina women. A variety of topics and disciplines (film, art, photography, philosophy, etc.) will be examined. Class material will include theoretical and critical texts, primarily from feminism. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year.
471
Hispanic Cinema
Study of Spanish, Latin American, Caribbean and Chicano cinema in its historical, political, and social context. Examines a variety of topics (national and gender identities, construction of myths, relations of cinema to popular culture, relations of cinema and literature, etc.). Use of contemporary theories of cinematographic expression. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year.
473
Hispanic Cultures
Overview of Hispanic history, literature and art. Use of essays, journalism, films and electronic media for classroom discussion. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year.
475
Topics in Spanish Language
Topics in Spanish phonology, dialectology, and other general aspects of the Spanish language. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year.
499
Topics in Hispanic Studies
Discussion of selected topics in Hispanic language, literature or culture.
505
Advanced Spanish
Advanced course in Spanish language and culture with particular emphasis on composition, vocabulary building and linguistic accuracy. Includes a capstone project to combine the knowledge and skills learned in the Spanish Major with other areas of concentration. It may include readings and enhancement of learning through other media.
523
Translation
Introduction to the theory and practice of translation from Spanish into English and from English into Spanish. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year to include other languages in addition to English.
533
Uses of Spanish as a Second Language
Introduction to basic issues related to the teaching of Spanish as a second language. In special circumstances the theoretical component may be taught in English. The practical component may vary from year-to-year.
553
Spanish American Literature to 1900
A survey of Spanish American literature in its cultural and historical context. Includes the study of indigenous voices, literature of the conquest, as well as the colonial period and the major authors of the nineteenth century. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year.
555
Spanish American Literature after 1900
Study of the major movements and authors of the twentieth century. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year.
557
Current Trends in Hispanic Studies
In-depth study of literary and cultural issues which could include marginalization, identity, nationalism, the emergence of silenced voices, or other new developments. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year.
563
Medieval Literature
Representative works of literature in the Spanish language from the tenth to the fifteenth centuries.
567
Early Modern Literature
Representative works of literature in the Spanish language from the sixteenth to the seventeenth centuries. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year.
571
Art and Literature
Study of the interrelations of the visual arts and literature, using as its reference Hispanic literary texts and works of art. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year.
573
Critical Analysis of Hispanic Cinemas
In-depth study of Hispanic Cinemas, including genres, movements, histories, industrial mechanisms of distribution, and cultural reception, in consolidated, developing and emerging film industries. Content can be organized based on region (Chicano/a, Mexican, Spanish cinema, etc.); topic (identity, transnationalism, women’s cinema, etc.); genre (road movie, documentary, border cinema, auteur cinema, etc.); filmmakers and/or by identifiable traditions (cine de la movida, Nuevo cine latinomericano, New cinemas, etc.). Use of contemporary theories and study of cinematographic techniques.
581
Spanish Literature and Culture from the Eighteenth Century to the Spanish Civil War
Survey of major works and cultural movements from the eighteenth century to the early twentieth century. Focus on reading and analytical skills. Format and content of the course may vary from year-to-year.
583
Spanish Literature and Culture from the Spanish Civil War to the Present
Interdisciplinary course stressing the relationship between various cultural manifestations and their socio-political background. Format and content of course may vary from year-to-year.
593
Literary Theory
An introduction to modern literary theory and its various schools of thought, with application to works of Hispanic literature.
598
Honours Thesis
Students carry out a research project under the supervision of a faculty member and submit a thesis written in Spanish.
599
Advanced Topics in Hispanic Studies
A specialized course for advanced students. Course may function as a seminar or as a directed readings course.
601
Literary and Cultural Theory

613
Critical Analysis of Medieval Texts

615
Golden Age Literature

617
Theatre and Performance in the Nineteenth or Twentieth Centuries

619
Post-Franco Literature, Art and Film

621
Art, Film and Literature in the Spanish Avant-Garde

623
Spanish American Literature and Culture to 1900

625
Twentieth-Century Spanish American Literature

627
Avant-Garde Movements in Spanish America

631
Popular Culture

633
Writings in Exile

635
Literature and the Visual Arts in Hispanic Culture

637
Identities and Post-Colonial Voices

639
Hispanic Female Voices

641
Hispanic Cinema

643
Special Topics in Hispanic Culture, Language or Literature

Statistics
36
205
Introduction to Statistical Inquiry
The systematic progression of statistical principles needed to conduct a statistical investigation culminating in parameter estimation, hypothesis testing, statistical modelling, and design of experiments.
213
Introduction to Statistics I
Collection and presentation of data, introduction to probability, including Bayes' law, expectations and distributions. Properties of the normal curve. Introduction to estimation and hypothesis testing.
217
Introduction to Statistics II
Estimation of population parameters; confidence intervals for means; choice of sample size. Tests of hypotheses including 2-sample tests and paired comparisons. The Chi-squared tests for association and goodness-of-fit. Regression and correlation; variance estimates; tests for regression and correlation coefficients. Non-parametric methods and associated tests. Time series, forecasting.
321
Introduction to Probability
A calculus-based introduction to probability theory and applications. Elements of probabilistic modelling, Basic probability computation techniques, Discrete and continuous random variables and distributions, Functions of random variables, Expectation and variance, Multivariate random variables, Conditional distributions, Covariance, Conditional expectation, Central Limit Theorem, Applications to real-world modelling.
323
Introduction to Theoretical Statistics
Statistics and their distributions. Introduction to statistical inference through point estimation and confidence interval estimation of a population parameter. Properties of statistics including unbiasedness and consistency in estimation. Single parameter hypothesis testing, Type I and Type II Error. Multi-parameter estimation through confidence interval estimation and hypothesis testing. The analysis of bivariate data through simple linear regression, including inferences on the parameters of the linear model and the analysis of variance. Chi-square test of independence and goodness of fit test.
327
Statistics for the Physical and Environmental Sciences
Introduction to the collection of data. Probability and probability distributions. Single and Multi-sample estimation of distribution parameters. Regression and Goodness of Fit tests. Experimental Design and Analysis of Variance.
421
Mathematical Statistics
An advanced examination of core concepts in mathematical statistics, including the multivariate normal distribution, limit distributions, sufficient statistics, completeness of families of distributions, exponential families, likelihood ratio tests, chi-square tests, and the analysis of variance. Additional topics and examples relating to sequential tests, non-parametric methods, Bayesian statistical modelling, and the general linear model may also be explored.
423
Statistical Analysis of Sample Survey
Introduction to questionnaire design of sample surveys. Treatment of the various sampling methodologies used in population parameter estimation. Ratio and regression estimation. Sampling weights and variance estimation of statistics. Estimation of population size and density. Non-response.
425
Statistical Design and Analysis of Experiments
Introduction to the design of experiments and the statistical analysis of data. Analysis of variance in the response variable and adequacy of the model. Multiple comparison methods. Extensions to completely randomized block, latin-squares, and factorial experimental design. Introduction to nested and split-plot design, with emphasis on statistical software usage.
429
Linear Models and Their Applications
Multiple linear regression model, parameter estimation, simultaneous confidence intervals and general linear hypothesis testing. Residual analysis and outliers. Model selection: best regression, stepwise regression algorithms. Transformation of variables and non-linear regression. Applications to forecasting. Variable selection in high-dimensional data using linear regression. Computer analysis of practical real world data.
431
Introduction to Biostatistics
Fundamental topics in biostatistics, including descriptive statistics, graphical presentation of data, analysis of variance (ANOVA), study designs, contingency tables, measures of association, tests of significance, categorical data analysis, regression, time to event data analysis.
505
Time Series Analysis
An introduction to the theory and tools to conduct time series analysis, with the emphasis on modelling and forecasting using a software. Stationarity, white noise, autocorrelation, partial autocorrelation, and linear predictor. Stationary ARIMA models, seasonality and trends. Model fitting, diagnostics and forecasting. Additional topics may include state space models, spectral analysis of time series, and GARCH models.
507
Introduction to Stochastic Processes
Markov chains. Limit distributions for ergodic and absorbing chains. Classification of states, irreducibility. The Poisson process and its generalizations. Continuous-time Markov chains. Brownian motion and stationary processes. Renewal theory.
517
Practice of Statistics
A capstone course intended for students in their final year of study. The emphasis is on how to address real world scientific and social issues by applying the various statistical methods acquired in the earlier years in a unified and appropriate way. This involves method selection, data handling, statistical computing, consulting, report writing and oral presentation, team work, and ethics.
519
Bayesian Statistics
Fundamentals of Bayesian inference, single and multiparameter models, hierarchical models, regression models, generalized linear models, advanced computational methods, Markov chain Monte Carlo.
523
Non-parametric Statistics
Non-parametric estimation and tests of hypotheses. Distribution-free tests. Asymptotic Theory. Re-sampling method and density estimation.
525
Applied Multivariate Analysis
Normal distribution. Statistical inference: confidence regions, hypothesis tests, analysis of variance, simultaneous confidence intervals. Multivariate statistical methods; principal components, factor analysis, discriminant analysis and classification, canonical correlation analysis, cluster analysis.
529
Special Topics in Applied Statistics
Content of the course will vary from year-to-year. Consult the Department for information on choice of topics.
531
Monte Carlo Methods and Statistical Computing
Introduction to statistical computing; random numbers generation; Monte Carlo methods (variance reduction technique; computation of definite integrals); Optimizations; Numerical integrations.
533
Survival Models
Nature and properties of survival models; methods of estimating tabular models from both complete and incomplete data samples including actuarial, moment and maximum likelihood techniques; estimations of life tables from general population data; Kaplan-Meier estimator and Nelson-Allan estimator; the accelerated failure time model; the Cox proportional hazards model; model building and high-dimensional survival data analysis.
541
Categorical Data Analysis
Description and inference for binomial and multinomial observations using proportions and odds ratios; multi-way contingency tables; generalized linear models for discrete data; logistic regression for binary responses; multi-category logit models for nominal and ordinal responses; loglinear models, and inference for matched-pairs and correlated clustered data.
543
Statistical Learning
Introduction and linear regression; classification; regularization; model assessment and selection; support vector machines; unsupervised learning; tree-based methods; additional topics selected by course instructor.
600
Research Seminar
A professional skills course, focusing on the development of technical proficiencies that are essential for students to succeed in their future careers as practicing statistician in academia, government, or industry. The emphasis is on delivering professional presentations and using modern statistical research tools. A high level of active student participation is required.
601
Topics in Probability and Statistics
The content of this course is decided from year-to-year in accordance with graduate student interest and instructor availability. Topics include but are not restricted to: Advanced Design of Experiments, Weak and Strong Approximation Theory, Asymptotic Statistical Methods, the Bootstrap and its Applications, Generalized Additive Models, Order Statistics and their Applications, Robust Statistics, Statistics for Spatial Data, Statistical Process Control, Time Series Models.
603
Applied Statistics for Nursing Research
Descriptive statistics; probability theory; statistical estimation/inference; power analysis; regression analysis; anova; logistic regression analysis; non-parametric tests; factor analysis; discriminant analysis; Cox's Proportional Hazard Model.
619
Bayesian Statistics
Fundamentals of Bayesian inference, single and multiparameter models, hierarchical models, regression models, generalized linear models, advanced computational methods, Markov chain Monte Carlo.
625
Multivariate Analysis
Normal distribution. Statistical inference: confidence regions, hypothesis tests, analysis of variance, simultaneous confidence intervals. Principal components. Factor Analysis. Discrimination and classification. Canonical correlation analysis.
631
Computational Statistics
Unconstrained optimization methods, simulation and random number generation, Bayesian inference and Monte Carlo methods, Markov chain Monte Carlo, non-parametric inference, classical inference and other topics. An emphasis will be placed on computational implementation of algorithms.
633
Survival Models
Advanced topics in survival models such as the product limit estimator, the cox proportional hazards model, time-dependent covariates, types of censorship.
635
Generalized Linear Models
Exponential family of distributions, binary data models, loglinear models, overdispersion, quasi-likelihood methods, generalized additive models, longitudinal data and generalized estimating equations, model adequacy checks.
637
Non-linear Regression
Topics include but are not restricted to selections from: linear approximations; model specification; various iterative techniques; assessing fit; multiresponse parameter estimation; models defined by systems of differential equations; graphical summaries of inference regions; curvature measures.
641
Statistical Learning
Introduction and Linear Regression; Classification; Regularization; Model Assessment and Selection; Support Vector Machines; Unsupervised Learning; Tree-Based Methods; Other Topics (e.g., Neural Networks, Graphical Models, High-Dimensional Data).
701
Theory of Probability I

703
Theory of Probability II
Stopping times, renewal theory, martingales, almost sure convergence, Radon-Nikodym derivatives, Doob’s inequality, square integrable martingales, uniform integrability, Markov chains, stationary measure, Birkhoff’s Ergodic Theorem, Brownian motion, stopping times, hitting times, Donsker’s Theorem, Brownian bridge, laws of the iterated logarithm.
721
Statistical Inference
Statistical models, likelihoods, maximum likelihood estimators, likelihood ratio, Wald and score tests, confidence intervals, bounds and regions, Bayesian estimation and testing, basic large sample theory, estimating equations, jackknife, bootstrap and permutation.
723
Theory of Hypothesis Testing
Likelihood ratio (LR), union-intersection, most powerful, unbiased and invariant tests, Neyman-Pearson Lemma, Karlin-Rubin Theorem, confidence interval (CI), pivotal quantities, shortest length and shortest expected length CI, uniformly most accurate CI, confidence region, simultaneous CI, large-sample tests (Wald’s, score, LR tests), Bayesian hypothesis testing, analysis of variance and linear models.
Strategic Studies
16
601
MSS First Term Co-operative Education
Strategic Studies first term co-operative education work placement.
602
MSS Second Term Co-operative Education
Strategic Studies second term co-operative education work placement.
603
Questions and Methods
A Block Week introduction to research design and methods in Military and Strategic Studies. Introduces the field, its history, major methodological debates and challenges of interdisciplinary research.
609
The Canadian Military in the Second World War
An examination of the political parameters imposed by the Canadian government, the quality of Canadian leadership, and the "fit" between British forms of military organization and the fighting quality of Canadian soldiers, sailors and airmen.
611
Canadian Military Studies
Canadian military studies, excepting the two world wars. Topics will include the evolution of Canadian defence policy, past or present, the development and evolution of the Canadian Forces or any of its main elements (army, navy or air force), Canadian military operability with the military forces of Allied nations, and the relationship between Canadian foreign policy and the use of the Canadian military.
613
The Canadian Military in the First World War
The development and operational achievements of the Canadian Expeditionary Force, wartime civil-military relations and conscription politics.
649
Special Topics in Military and Strategic Studies

651
Reading Seminar

653
Research Seminar

655
Classics of Strategy
Strategic thought from Sun Tzu to Clausewitz, Mahan to Corbett. Analyzes the writings of classic strategic thinkers and then, by way of case studies, examines their theories as they pertain to military and political planners from the Peloponnesian War to the present.
657
Intelligence; Information Operations; and "Command, Control, Communications and Computers"
An assessment of the history of intelligence, information operations, and command systems for military and diplomatic institutions as well as contemporary theory and practice related to these issues.
659
Sea Power
The meaning of sea power and an assessment of how modern states use it. An analysis of the writings of major naval strategic thinkers and case-study examination of the application of those theories from Nelson to the present.
662
Advanced Studies in Canadian Arctic Security
The Canadian Arctic is an emerging area of concern due to changes scarcely imaginable even a few years ago. Examines the nature of some of these changes – e.g. climate change and the northern seas’ dramatically changing ice conditions, growing recognition of the region’s resource wealth, and evolving international relations in the circumpolar region – and what they mean for Canadian Arctic Security.
663
Wars – Causes and Aftermaths
An examination of the complexity and experience of conflict and war as well as the broader institutions that govern post-conflict recovery and transition in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Special attention will be paid to the methodological complexities of studying violence.
751
Reading Seminar

753
Research Seminar

Strategy and Global Management
25
217
Introduction to Business Skills
Introduction to the external business environment, human resource management, and marketing. Topics will include ethical decision-making, teamwork, secondary research, proper use of business communication tools and presentation skills. Pedagogical approaches may include case analysis, exercises, simulations, and class discussion.
371
International Business
Covers the concepts and knowledge base required to understand how foreign cultural, economic and political developments affect the strategies of firms involved in international trade and investment, as well as of firms often seen as principally domestic in orientation.
403
Business in BRIC Markets

405
East Asia in the World Economy
Investigation of how firms become international and achieve superior performance in the international business environment, with an emphasis on Asia. Exploration of opportunities and contemporary issues for doing business in the diverse countries of Asia. Similarities and differences in business practices among Asian countries are studied. International business concepts and strategies for doing business in Asia are considered.
407
International Business Regulation
International business regulations are examined, and their impact on a firm's international strategies are analyzed. Exploration of how multinational enterprises must simultaneously adapt to the external/regulatory environments of their home country and multiple host countries.
409
Cross-Cultural Management
Introduction to the challenges posed by managing in international environments and across cultural boundaries. Emphasis is placed on understanding the nature of cultural differences; the influence of these differences on organizational processes including leadership, teams, communication, ethics and conflict resolution; their impact on human resource practices including staffing and performance management; and implications for those holding international managerial roles.
559
Selected Topics in Strategy and Global Management
Examination of selected topics in Strategy and Global Management.
571
Business Under USMCA
Legal, political, economic and social considerations important to Canadian firms pursuing the US and/or Mexican markets, including the implications of the United States - Mexico - Canada Agreement.
573
Business with Japan
An integrated approach to the cultural, governmental and structural factors influencing the conduct of business with Japan, whether as a supplier, customer, partner or investor.
577
International Strategic Management
A focus on why and how firms internationalize and the strategic challenges facing firms that operate within an international business environment. The course covers key concepts, theories and perspectives in international management. These are critiqued, contextualized and applied to particular firm level cases.
579
Co-ordinating Global Business
Applies international business theory to the practical operational challenges faced by international managers with a focus on functional implications throughout the entire value chain of the firm's cross-border activities.
589
Field Investigation in International Business
Research project based on a live "case". Student groups are presented with a case of a real-world local multinational company facing an international strategy issue, conduct primary and secondary research, analyze impediments, and apply knowledge and skills gained to provide actionable recommendations for managers in charge of international strategy. Final projects may be submitted as IVEY teaching cases in cooperation with interested faculty.
591
Strategic Management
Analysis of competitive situations from the general management point of view, including fit between key environmental forces and the firm's resources, and changes in these over time. Formulating and implementing strategy based on that analysis. Developing and leveraging a firm's core competencies to gain long-term sustainable advantage.
601
Strategic Management I
The role of the CEO and other senior executives in formulating and implementing corporate strategies, and provides an overview of key strategic issues and topics. Covers such areas as industry analysis, executive leadership, corporate strategy, corporate diversification, strategic change, global strategy, mergers and acquisitions, and strategic implications of new technologies.
672
Strategic Analysis
Introduction to the key concepts, tools, and principles of strategy formulation and competitive analysis.
674
International Business
Strategic challenges of managing and operating within an international business environment, their potential implications at a firm level, strategies for firms competing in international markets, and operational tactics employed in functional areas.
707
Advanced Strategic Management Tools
Re-examination of the main tools used in strategy analysis with a unique triple focus on: 1) inclusion only of tools that are actionable and lead to outcomes with clear management implications; 2) critical assessment of the ‘limits’ associated with applying each tool (boundary conditions; weaknesses; danger of wrong interpretation of results; unexpected negative spill-over effects; etc.); and 3) discussion of the most recent insights from the scholarly and practitioner oriented literatures, emphasizing dynamics.
725
e-Strategy
The impact of Internet technology on strategic management of large corporations. How the technology influences industry structure and how it drives companies' competitive strategies and their organizational structures and systems. Explores the implications for strategic leadership in organizations.
751
Strategic Management in the Global Energy Industry
Characteristics of the energy industry. Major strategic issues facing top management teams in corporations involved in oil and gas and power businesses and relevant strategic tools for addressing them. Industry structure, energy value chain, key players and their strategies, industry dynamics and trends, supply and demand, expansion, M&As, roles of governments, OPEC and international politics, Kyoto Protocol, major technological drivers, organization and top management leadership.
775
International Business Environment
The environment which influences international business activities including economic, legal, political and socio-cultural factors. Foreign direct investment in Canada will also be considered.
789
Seminar in Strategy and Global Management
Study and discussion of current research literature and contemporary issues on topics related to Strategy and Global Management in the private and/or the public sectors.
795
Strategic Management II
Application of strategic concepts and frameworks of analysis. Decisions and the processes to mobilize resources for the attainment of objectives. Measurement of performance through industry and competitive analysis.
796
Qualitative Research in Strategy and Organizations
Processes of collecting, analyzing, and reporting qualitative data, as well as inducing theory from them. Application to the area of Strategy and Organizations is emphasized. Focus on various approaches to qualitative research and on developing competence in conducting it.
797
Advanced Seminar in Strategy and Global Management

799
Doctoral Seminars in Strategy and Global Management

Supply Chain Management
4
451
Supply Chain Management Analysis
Current issues confronting supply chain managers are examined. The role of supply chain management in the overall strategy and performance of companies is studied. Students analyze real-world cases and develop suitable solutions to improve supply chain operations. Topics include advanced inventory management, supply chain co-ordination, network design and risk management.
453
Procurement Management
An in-depth analysis of strategic procurement practices for competitive advantage, cost management, contractual negotiations and supplier management. Strategic implications of supply processes, outsourcing, and supplier relations are discussed.
455
Logistics Management
Logistics entails some of the major operations of supply chains. The objective of this course is to introduce the general concepts and analytical tools of logistics management from a supply chain perspective.
559
Selected Topics in Supply Chain Management
Investigation of selected topics in Supply Chain Management.
Sustainability Studies
5
201
Exploring Sustainability
Examines principles, practices, obstacles and opportunities pertaining to sustainability. Potential issues to be explored include: Sustainability: Origins, Principles and Practices; Sustainable Development; Planning for Sustainability: The Campus, The City and Beyond; Resource Audits and Sustainability; Corporations and Responsibility; Government and Governance; Climate Change.
401
Sustainability Research Methods
Understanding sustainability research, research processes, mixed methods, quantitative and qualitative approaches to data collection and analysis, etc. This will help students to identify their research projects and to become well prepared to conduct applied research projects.
403
Sustainability Research Project
Students develop applied research projects to engage in experiential learning with partners both on and off-campus.
501
Capstone in Sustainability Studies
Emphasizes reflection and integration through experiential learning experiences from research projects and applied problem solving. Students will apply the lessons learned through reflective writing, presentations, case studies, and career goals development.
503
Directed Studies
Supervised independent study of a specific topic.
Sustainable Energy Development
17
601
Energy Systems I: Non-Renewable Energy
Interactions between non-renewable energy resources and the environment; exploration, production and exploitation of energy resources, including conventional and unconventional oil and gas, coal, and nuclear; technical, economic and environmental and policy aspects of production transportation and use of non-renewable energy.
603
Energy Systems II: Renewable Energy
Renewable energy sources, such as: wind, hydro, solar photovoltaic, solar heat collection, geothermal, biomass, cogeneration; system level physical modelling; steady-state turbine operation; introductory thermodynamics; economic tools, such as levelized cost of energy analysis.
605
Indigenous Peoples and Sustainability in Energy Development
In-depth analysis of indigenous peoples and ecological sustainability in relation to energy development. Systems ecology, ecological economics, cultural anthropology, indigenous rights and ethics provide theoretical foundations for sustainable development in global context of indigenous peoples with primary focus on Canadian indigenous peoples. Historical and legal-political context addresses treaties, policy and land-use including duty to consult and accommodate with emphasis on reconciliation.
607
Water Pollution and its Impact on the Energy Sector
Water pollution, water chemistry, water and wastewater quality and quantities, conventional, non-conventional and emerging contaminants, water and wastewater treatment methods, water usage and reuse options, municipal and industrial water treatment, water energy nexus, water requirements and pollution as related to the energy sector.
609
Air Pollution and its Impact on the Energy Sector
Population growth and energy options; meteorological parameters, physical and chemical properties of the atmosphere; nature of pollutants present: anagenetic-made sources; stationary and mobile; generation, methods of control and effects of photochemical smog; global warming; particulates, acid rain gases, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons and their emission control; pollution monitoring and instrumentation; environmental regulations; tail gas clean-up; health impacts; industrial site selection; pollutant dispersion.
611
Land Pollution and Waste Management in the Energy Sector
Waste management principles and effective practices in the development of energy projects. Causes and consequences of land pollution associated with energy production and management practices and technologies for prevention, mitigation and control of pollution.
613
Energy Systems III: Planning and Energy Economics
Financial principles and evaluation techniques and their application to energy investment planning; assessment methods applied to real-world examples; assessment of foundations in environmental energy economics and policies.
615
Environmental Impact Assessment in the Energy Sector
Principles and professional practice of environmental impact assessment, with application to energy development projects.
617
Human Resource and Management in the Energy Sector
Major concepts and theories of management and organizational dynamics as they impact on the energy sector; Interpersonal effectiveness and self-awareness, motivation, group dynamics, project teams, supportive communication, stress, leadership, power, influence and conflict, organizational culture, processes of change.
619
Environmental Law in the Energy Sector
General legal concepts, administrative law, aspects and sources of environmental law, environmental decision making, international agreements and treaties, and law reform.
621
Environmental Management Tools in the Energy Sector
Environmental management systems and issues are discussed as they relate to organizational and environmental impacts. Topics include: environmental management for both compliance and innovation; management processes including audits, development of indicators and reporting, green product development, risk management.
623
Strategic Environmental Planning for Energy Organizations
The strategy of sustainable development concepts and principles and their application to energy policies and development opportunities for businesses, including stakeholder engagement.
631
Life Cycle Assessment in the Energy Sector
The concept of life cycle assessment (LCA) as it applies to energy production and consumption from an environmental and sustainability perspective; Use of LCA to support informed decision-making for improved environmental performance of energy projects and for avoiding problem-shifting and sub-optimization.
640
Capstone Project I: Research Design
Identification of potential capstone project research questions that are anchored in energy, environment and one other aspect of the student’s choice; development of research designs and skills to determine the feasibility of investigating potential research questions, narrowing options, and advancing the best option into a short proposal.
641
Capstone Project II: Proposal Development
Writing a comprehensive proposal designed to answer a research question. Seeking approval from a supervisor with expertise on the chosen topic, with guidance from the course instructor. Verbally presenting the research question and convincing the audience of its importance. Continuing investigation of the research question with progress reports submitted to both the supervisor and the course instructor.
642
Capstone Project III: Research Exploration and Examination
Exploring the research question through an in-depth literature review, data collection, and analyses of the aspects of energy, environment, and one other aspect. Completion and submission of a professionally prepared final report that explains the investigation and findings. Presentation of findings.
699
Topics in Energy and the Environment
Study of selected topics related to energy and the environment and related subjects. Specific course(s) will reflect changing needs and faculty interests.
Term Abroad Program
4
201
National Language I
Instruction in the Language (or one of the languages) of the country of residence as part of a Term Abroad Program.
203
National Language II

301
National Language Intermediate I

303
National Language Intermediate II

Tourism Management
2
309
Introduction to Leisure, Tourism and Society
An interdisciplinary introduction to the concepts, methods and practices of leisure, recreation and tourism studies.
409
Travel and Tourism Management
Economic, social, cultural, political, and technological dimensions of tourism, in particular changing travel markets, industry structure, evolving issues and problems.
Transportation Studies
8
301
Transportation Systems and Analysis
An introduction to sources of data and methods of analysis for describing and analyzing transportation systems. Transportation systems will be treated at the municipal, provincial and federal levels and on a modal basis.
303
Introduction to Transportation Studies
Provides a critical foundation for understanding transportation systems in their modern context, with a particular emphasis on a broad, policy focused exploration. Topics include the role of various transportation modes in Canada's development as a nation, the current status of Canadian transportation modes, and challenges facing the transportation system.
473
Introduction to Transportation Planning
Goals and objectives of urban and regional transportation planning; the transportation planning process; trip generation, trip distribution, modal split, traffic assignment; transportation surveys and data collection; fundamentals of traffic flow; capacity and level of service; urban transportation technology; computer simulation models of urban transportation; environmental impacts; transportation systems management; energy considerations; pedestrian movement systems; urban goods movement; impact of transportation system on city growth; urban transportation policy and financing in Canada.
499
Group Project in Transportation Issues

503
Decision Support Systems in Transportation Planning
An exploration of the history of decision support in transportation planning from theory to application, including a critical exploration of the 1960's through to modern spatial and aspatial approaches, with an emphasis on critically understanding the decision-support techniques of modern transportation planning. Students will use modern decision-support software tools.
511
Selected Topics in Transportation Economics
Topics may vary from year-to-year. Provides students with in-depth coverage of transportation issues in a specific sector or region in Canada and relies heavily on microeconomic analysis. Consult the Transportation Studies Program Director for topics available in a given year.
513
Selected Topics in Transportation Policy
Analysis of government's role in regulating, financing, and managing transportation infrastructure and operations. Comparison of cases in Asia, North America, and Europe will highlight the challenges and opportunities of making transportation more sustainable. Consult the Transportation Studies Program Director for the topics to be explored in a given year.
599
Independent Research in Transportation Issues
Individual work on an assigned topic concerning a practical transportation issue under the supervision of a faculty member. The project will normally involve a literature review and the application of theoretical analysis to an actual problem encountered by practitioners. Submission and defence of a midterm progress report and a final report are included.
University
13
201
Global Challenges Inquiry I
Students will engage in inquiry-based learning to explore solutions to a complex, socially relevant problem using knowledge, evidence, and methods from multiple disciplines, under the guidance of University of Calgary experts. Examples of problems include poverty, water and food security, child health, racial conflict, and gender discrimination.
203
Global Challenges Inquiry II
Students will continue to engage in inquiry-based learning to explore solutions to a complex, socially relevant problem using knowledge, evidence, and methods from multiple disciplines, under the guidance of University of Calgary experts.
205
Effective Learning Strategies
Theories, research and practice regarding learning and thinking in adult learners. The importance of metacognition, attention, memory, emotions, motivation and attitudes to learning will be discussed. Students will apply the theory and research to their own learning experiences.
301
The Poisoned Pen
Consideration of poisons from two different perspectives, science and literature. Using a problem-based approach, students will not only learn what makes a poison effective but also the essence of good story-telling.
401
Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies
The focused examination of a topic from a variety of interdisciplinary perspectives.
501
Experiential Learning
An application of theory in a community or workplace setting.
511
Special Topics in Sustainability

513
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Design Practice

515
Advanced Interdisciplinary Design Practice

601
Ethics of Research with Human Subjects
A multidisciplinary course addressing issues in research with human subjects. Topics include theoretical approaches to understanding ethics, respect for persons, benefit and harm, confidentiality and publication, and selection of research subjects. Taught by a multidisciplinary team with very broad experience on research ethics boards.
611
Special Topics in Sustainability

613
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Design Practice

615
Advanced Interdisciplinary Design Practice

University Exchange
4
200
Topics in Exchange I

300
Topics in Exchange II

400
Topics in Exchange III

500
Topics in Exchange IV

Urban Studies
12
253
Introduction to Cities
A broad introductory survey, from diverse perspectives, of the processes that shape cities and urban life.
311
The Gendered City
Introduction to urban gender issues from historical and spatial perspectives. Issues such as the gendering of urban design and planning, daily urban activities, urban labour markets, urban politics, gentrification, suburbanization, and identity construction in urban places are addressed.
313
The City in Film
Introduction to the representation of cities in film. Theoretical understandings of urban processes are linked to urban experiences as portrayed in urban film. Topics may include changing urban form, suburbanization, economic restructuring, racial conflict, community formation, urban politics, and more. May focus on particular cities around the world.
394
Overseas Field School in Sustainable Urbanism Part I
Field research focusing on urban sustainability themes in regions outside North America. Group travel-study combined with formal instruction and seminars.
395
Overseas Field School in Sustainable Urbanism Part II
Field research focusing on urban sustainability themes in regions outside North America. Group travel-study combined with formal instruction and seminars.
451
Planning in the Canadian City
Introduction to Canadian urban planning theory and practice. Focuses on the history of planning, and aspects of practice such as neighbourhood planning, historic preservation, urban design and long-range planning.
461
The Transit City
An exploration of the relationships among public transit, urban form, and land use planning and policy in the context of challenges such as climate change, energy shortages, widespread urbanization and traffic congestion.
501
Research in Selected Topics
An examination of selected topics in Urban Studies in a lecture format.
505
Advanced Topics in Urban Studies
An examination of selected topics in Urban Studies in a seminar format.
553
Seminar in Urban Theory
Overview of contemporary themes in urban theory such as modernity and postmodernity, political economy, production of social difference, public and private space, globalization, inequality, and urban sustainability. Topics may vary depending on developments in the field and student interests.
591
Capstone in Urban Studies
Capstone course applying the broad interdisciplinary training of the Urban Studies Program to selected problems in urban studies.  Collaborative research and analysis is stressed.
596
Directed Independent Study
Advanced study of a particular topic under the direct supervision of a faculty member.
Veterinary Medicine
65
300
Clinical Presentations I
A series of integrated clinical presentations applied to a range of problems faced in veterinary medicine in individuals, groups, and populations of animals. Students develop analytic and non-analytic diagnostic reasoning skills, and use foundational knowledge from discipline courses to help understand clinical presentations.
305
Clinical Skills I
A series of clinically-oriented learning experiences aimed at developing competence in individual animal and herd physical examinations and reporting. Students develop basic skill sets in clinical intervention, patient management, and disease prevention. Experience is gained in diagnostic procedures.
307
Professional Skills I
Professionalism, applied economics and business, clinical communication skills, ethics and jurisdiction, and research in veterinary medicine are explored. Students will begin to formulate competencies in these areas and in stewardship, clinical reasoning and small business management. The concepts of the healthy veterinarian and self-management are introduced.
320
Anatomy and Histology
Provides a foundation in comparative anatomy of production and companion animals. Histology and embryology are integrated throughout. Guided and task-driven dissections are supplemented with pro-sections of live animals, and medical imagery. Clinically relevant structures and the three-dimensional relationships of organs are emphasized.
321
Physiology
Provides a foundation in fundamental and comparative physiological concepts for each body system. Physiological concepts are reinforced through clinical presentations of production and companion animals. Emphasis placed upon formulating how, and why, a disturbance affecting one particular body system manifests in a particular way.
322
Animal Behaviour and Welfare
Fundamental concepts of behaviour and welfare are examined. Emphasis is placed on understanding normal and abnormal behaviour, and the effects of husbandry practices on behaviour and welfare of production and companion animals. Wildlife behaviour, particularly at the interface with human activities, is addressed. Legislations and societal changes regarding animal welfare are discussed.
323
Animals, Health, and Society
Roles of veterinarians in promoting, and contributing to, animal, human and ecosystem health are discussed. Emphasis is placed on determinants of health, and the interactions of animals, humans and the environment. Demonstrates how laws, policies and management decisions are applied to foster healthy animals, ecosystems and human-animal interactions.
324
Genetics and Molecular Biology
Fundamental concepts of genetics and molecular biology are explored in the context of cellular biology and animal health. Applications of molecular biology tools in veterinary medicine are addressed. Relevant examples from veterinary medicine are used to explain foundation principles.
342
Pathologic Basis of Disease
Morphologic and functional changes in cells, tissues and organs as a result of disease are discussed. Students are introduced to safe, systematic approaches to performing post-mortem examinations and learn to recognize and describe common gross and microscopic lesions using appropriate medical terminology. Emphasis is placed on the understanding of basic disease mechanisms.
343
Immunology
Students will gain a working knowledge of the immune system and its role in health and disease. Emphasis is placed on achieving an understanding of major immunological concepts and vaccinology and their implications in veterinary medicine.
344
Principles of Epidemiology
Introduction to epidemiological concepts including types of epidemiologic studies, measures of disease frequency and association, epidemic and infectious disease dynamics, principles of evidence-based medicine, and the relationships between population and individual animal medicine. Provides foundational skills relevant to population medicine.
345
Introduction to Nutrition
Presents fundamental concepts pertaining to function, metabolism, requirements, and sources of nutrients and energy for production and companion animals. Feeds and ingredients used in animal diets are also examined.
360
Introduction to Veterinary Medicine
Students explore how people associate with animals, the issues that arise from these associations and the roles that veterinarians play in these contexts. Students observe animals as companions, in sport, for food, and in research. The structure and function of the major livestock industries and the roles that veterinarians occupy within those industries are examined.
400
Clinical Presentations II

405
Clinical Skills II

407
Professional Skills II

410
Basic Surgical Principles
A comprehensive introduction to general veterinary surgery principles across species. Provides students with a foundation in the basic principles of soft tissue and orthopedic surgery that can then be used to develop their hands-on surgical skills.
420
Health Management

421
Systemic Pathology

422
Virology
Fundamental knowledge on the nature of viruses and prions are imparted through clinical, cellular and molecular analysis of important diseases of animals and, if inter-transmissible, humans. Students learn to develop diagnostic plans and understand principles of laboratory diagnostic testing. Implementation of intervention measures for viral and prion infections and diseases are discussed.
423
Bacteriology
Introduction to fundamental principles of bacteriology, and bacterial diseases of domestic animals. Provides an understanding of how bacteria interact with the environment and the animal host, and how bacterial virulence mechanisms lead to animal diseases. Diagnosis of bacterial infections, and matching of appropriate preventive and control measures with different pathogens are discussed.
424
Parasitology
Introduction to fundamental principles of parasitism in domestic and wild animals. Emphasis is placed on understanding the occurrence, transmission and impacts of parasites, and diagnosis of parasitic diseases of clinical, trade, and zoonotic importance in North America.
440
Public Health and Risk Analysis
The roles of animals as sources of public health hazards and as sentinels for public health risk are examined. Students apply systems thinking to identify how zoonotic diseases and food safety hazards emerge, spread and are controlled. Public health strategies related to veterinary issues are applied to identify options for the prevention and control of hazards and reduction of health risks.
442
Clinical Pathology
Students develop a systematic approach to the use, evaluation and correct interpretation of routine clinical pathology tests. Integration of laboratory results with the patient's clinical presentation is emphasized. Correct interpretation of routine laboratory tests, communication of results, and appropriate integration of lab tests into decision-making in daily practice are covered.
443
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology
Effective and safe use of drugs in veterinary medicine. Basic principles of pharmacology, including mechanisms of action, for the major drug classes. Clinical toxicology principles that apply to common poisonings and adverse drug reactions.
444
Diagnostic Imaging
Introduction to principles and uses of common diagnostic imaging modalities. The theoretical basis behind each imaging technology, the acquisition of quality images, and the ability to interpret and describe normal and abnormal findings are emphasized. Control measures for working safely with diagnostic imaging equipment are examined.
450
Selected Topics in Areas of Emphasis I
Students select from two of the Faculty's four major areas of emphasis: production animal health or  equine health.
451
Selected Topics in Areas of Emphasis II
Students are exposed to career options in two of the Faculty's four major areas of emphasis: ecosystem and public health, and investigative medicine.
460
Applied Nutrition
Core concepts pertaining to nutritional requirements, feeding regimes, and nutritional disorders in production and companion animals are examined. Feeding management of exotic animals is also discussed. Emphasis is placed on practical application of nutritional concepts in production and companion animals.
461
Outbreak Investigation

462
Foreign Animal Disease
Students work through a simulation of an incursion of foreign animal disease into Canada. The simulation and background gives students experience working with disease surveillance, case identification, emergency preparedness, and the role of public practice veterinarians in maintaining the safety of Canadian livestock.
463
Field Experiences in Areas of Emphasis
Students select a field experience in one of the Faculty's four major areas of emphasis: production animal health, equine health, ecosystem and public health, or investigative medicine.
500
Clinical Presentations III

505
Clinical Skills III

507
Professional Skills III

520
Advanced Health Management
Provides an overview of diagnosing, managing, and preventing common disorders that occur at a population level. Emphasis is placed upon application of evidence-based medicine to make a herd diagnosis and control, and prevent the problem. Health programs and animal welfare assessment for production and companion animals are explored.
521
Equine Medicine and Surgery
Prepares students for general equine practice by providing the foundational knowledge needed for diagnosing and treating  common equine diseases using medical or surgical approaches. Emphasizes the importance of professional conduct in the context of equine practice and promotes life-long continuing education.
522
Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
Prepares students for small animal practice by providing the foundational knowledge needed for diagnosing and treating common diseases in cats and dogs using medical or surgical approaches. Promotes practices that comply with animal welfare professional conduct.
523
Anaesthesiology and Therapeutics
Introduction to the principals and practice of veterinary anaesthesiology and therapeutics in production, companion and exotic animals, and the practical application of clinical pharmacology. Focus on local and general anaesthesia for low risk animals and on therapeutic decisions, drug selection, and drug delivery.
530
Selected Topics in Clinical Medicine
Prepares students for clinical practice by providing the foundational knowledge needed for diagnosing and treating oncologic, ophthalmic and dermatological diseases in production and companion animals.
531
Selected Topics in Small Ruminant, South American Camelid and Non-traditional Livestock Production
Selected medical, surgical and reproductive diseases of small ruminants, South American camelids and non-traditional livestock.
540
Food Animal Medicine and Surgery
Prepares students for general food animal practice by providing the foundational knowledge needed for diagnosing, treating and preventing common diseases using medical or surgical approaches. Promotes practices that comply with animal welfare and professional conduct.
541
Theriogenology
Provides knowledge and skills to develop clinical competence in managing the reproductive health of production and companion animals. Students integrate knowledge from various disciplines to diagnose and manage clinical issues pertaining to the reproductive health of animals on an individual animal or herd basis.
542
Emergency and Critical Care
Veterinary emergency and critical care, with emphasis on how to recognize and implement therapy in the unstable patient.
550
Zoological Medicine
Provides the foundational knowledge needed for diagnosing, treating and preventing common diseases in non-traditional companion animal and wildlife species.
551
Laboratory Animal Medicine
Provides an introduction to laboratory animal medicine and disease, roles of the laboratory animal veterinarian and animal care committees, and the involvement of animals in research and teaching.
561
Ecosystem and Public Health Field Course

570
Laboratory Diagnostics
Required for entering general veterinary practice. Students must successfully complete rotations in laboratory diagnostics and diagnostic imaging at laboratories at the Clinical Skills Building on the Spy Hill campus.
580
General Veterinary Practice
Required for entering general veterinary practice. Students must successfully complete clinical rotations in general veterinary practice at sites located within the Distributed Veterinary Teaching Hospital.
582
Production Animal Health
Students choose from a variety of rotations that enable concentration within Production Animal Health.
583
Ecosystem and Public Health
Students choose from a variety of rotations that enable concentration within Ecosystem and Public Health.
584
Equine Health
Students choose from a variety of rotations that enable concentration within Equine Health.
585
Investigative Medicine
Students choose from a variety of rotations that enable concentration within Investigative Medicine.
590
Clinical Enrichment
Students choose elective rotations from a range of practicum experiences in veterinary medicine in order to expand or deepen their knowledge and skills.
601
Professional Skills in Health Science Research
Includes a series of workshops focusing on skills essential for success in health science research. Topics include: Research Integrity; Ethics; Grants and Grant Writing; Verbal and Written Communication of Research Findings; Career Development; and Career Options in the Health Sciences.
603
Biology of Laboratory Animals
Based on the Canadian Council on Animal Care Syllabus “Basic Principles of Laboratory Animal Science for Research Scientists.” In addition to the study of common, research, farm and exotic animals, topics to be covered include ethical considerations, regulation and legislation, animal models, animal facilities and husbandry, hazard control, surgery, anaesthesiology, euthanasia and post-mortem examinations. Practical sessions will provide experience in handling and restraint of specific laboratory animals, injections, blood collection, anaesthesiology and surgery.
605
Introduction to Biostastical Methods
Analysis and design of research related to biological sciences. Emphasis is placed upon formulating good research questions, evaluating the appropriateness of different statistical methods for analyzing results, and performing and interpreting such statistical analyses. Statistical analyses will be carried out using modern statistical software.
610
Biostatistics I: Essentials of Biostatistics
Introduces the fundamental concepts of summarizing data and statistical inference, including graphical displays, hypothesis testing, p-values, and confidence intervals. Specific topics include comparisons of means and proportions, non-parametric tests, correlation and regression, confounding, sample size determination, and power calculations. Additional topics include a brief introduction to analysis of variance and covariance, logistic regression, and analysis of time-to-event data. Students gain hands-on experience analysing data using STATA statistical software. Although this course uses STATA exclusively, much of the technical knowledge and some of the computing techniques are applicable to any statistical package.
611
Biostatistics II: Models for Health Outcomes
Extends the fundamental concepts to modelling health outcomes using modern regression analysis techniques. Logistic and linear regressions, and their extensions, are covered in detail. The rationale, formulation, and statistical assumptions underlying each regression technique are discussed. Methods for selecting and assessing models are included. Additional topics include a brief introduction to models used in the analysis of repeated measures, longitudinal studies, and time-to-event data.
640
Fundamentals of Epidemiology
Principles and methods of descriptive and analytic epidemiology. Emphasizes the underlying concepts and approaches of epidemiological research and critical appraisal of epidemiologic studies including: observational study designs and their vulnerabilities to bias, measures of frequency and association, basic methods for addressing sampling variability, confounding, and effect modification. Concepts related to causal judgment in epidemiology are also introduced.
690
Directed Study
Lectures, seminars, term papers and/or other training directed to one or only a few students in theoretical and/or laboratory methods at the advanced level in veterinary medical sciences. These courses are offered when no other suitable alternatives are available.
701
Advanced Topics in Reproductive Health
A series of topics, ranging from basic sciences to clinical topics (including ethical issues) to increase awareness and comprehension regarding current issues in reproductive health.
702
Advanced Topics in Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine
Provides a comprehensive overview of stem cell biology in the context of embryonic development and adult tissue maintenance. Students will gain an appreciation for embryonic versus adult stem cells and how these pluripotent or multipotent cells may be utilized in regenerative medicine (i.e. treatment of congenital defects, diseases or injury).
721
Wildlife Parasitology: Principles and Techniques
Students will learn about the ecology of parasites in wildlife populations with emphasis on impacts of parasitism, invasive species, and conservation issues. This is taught through a series of seminars, critical evaluation and discussion of the literature, and independent and group projects. Laboratory sessions include on parasitology techniques for surveillance and research.
740
Advanced Epidemiology
An expansion on the understanding of causality and threats to validity in epidemiologic research. The focus will be on the assessment and control of bias, including selection, information and confounding. The concept of effect modification (interaction) will be appraised. Stratified analysis will be considered as a tool for the assessment and control of confounding and effect modification and will be applied to a variety of study designs including case-control, and cohort studies.
Wellbeing
2
300
Challenges of Intersectionality in Mental Wellbeing
Evaluation of cultural, structural, systemic, and/or socioeconomic issues related to positive mental health and wellbeing in today’s society, through an intersectional lens that may include an analysis of ethnicity, culture, race, socioeconomic status, age, ability/disability, gender, sexuality, and other factors. Focus on developing students’ abilities to foster mental wellbeing in others.
400
Capstone in Mental Wellbeing
Reflection and integration of experiential learning to engage in applied problem solving. Focus on helping students to become agents of change, fostering mental wellbeing in the community.
Women's Studies
10
201
Talking Gender and Sexuality
An interdisciplinary and intersectional examination of the social and cultural constructions of gender and sexuality. Uses a series of case studies involving historical events and current affairs to discuss how ideas about gender and sexual identity shape our social systems, cultural expression, and political values. The Canadian context is emphasized.
303
Topics in Feminism
Explores key issues in feminist theory and activism, including relevant related issues in gender, sexuality, race and others.
305
Topics in Gender and Sexuality
Explores key issues in gender and sexuality studies.
311
Theorizing Gender and Sexuality
Explores contemporary approaches to theorizing gender and sexuality, with attention to their historical bases. Includes consideration of feminist, queer, trans, and intersectional theories.
315
Methods for Gender and Sexuality Research
Explores the scholarly and political implications of engaging in research on gender and sexuality by examining key feminist, queer, trans, and intersectional methods.
401
Special Topics in Feminist, Gender, and Sexuality Studies
An in-depth exploration of a specific area of research interest in feminist, gender or sexuality studies.
405
Praxis Seminar
Reflection upon best practices and theoretical paradigms for feminist, gender, and sexuality activism. Activist/volunteer work, outside of class-time, will be required.
501
Independent Research
Supervised individual study of a special topic. Intended primarily for students in Women’s Studies programs.
503
Community Service Learning
An opportunity for students to learn from volunteer service in community organizing and/or activism relating to feminist, gender, and sexuality studies. Students will present findings related to their community engagement placement to the class in scheduled sessions during the term.
590
Honours Thesis
Supervised individual research and preparation of an Honours thesis.
Zoology
17
401
An Introduction to Invertebrate Zoology
Natural history and diversity of invertebrates, which include sponges, corals, jellyfish, snails, octopus, insects, crustaceans, sea stars, and various worms. Emphasis on how free-living and parasitic organisms feed, move, reproduce, and survive in marine, freshwater, and terrestrial habitats.
403
An Introduction to Vertebrate Zoology
Systematics, natural history and biology of vertebrates, including fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals. Laboratory work will emphasize the identification and morphology of native taxa as well as basic techniques of biological systematics.
435
Entomology
Introduction to the insects, with emphasis on diversity, evolution, structure/function relationships, behaviour, and ecology.
461
Animal Physiology I
Study of control mechanisms in nerves, sensory organs, muscles and endocrine glands.
463
Animal Physiology II
Study of body fluids and hemostasis, body defence systems, reproductive physiology, respiration, circulation, excretion, gastrointestinal physiology and thermoregulation.
507
Advanced Topics in Zoology
Independent research, lectures, seminars, term papers and training in theoretical and/or laboratory methods.
515
Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy
The structural, functional, developmental and evolutionary relationships of the organs and systems of the vertebrates. Laboratory work will emphasize the dissection, identification and homologies of structures in various vertebrates.
528
Independent Studies in Zoology
Original and independent thought, practical research and the completion of written and oral reports.
530
Honours Research Project in Zoology
Research project under the direction of one or more faculty members in the Department of Biological Sciences. Formal written and oral reports must be presented on completion of this course. Open only to Honours Zoology students or Honours Biological Sciences students.
567
Animal Behaviour
Offered from an evolutionary and ecological perspective. Development of ethological ideas; interaction of genotype and environment in ontogeny of behaviour; role of behaviour in dealing with environmental challenges.
571
Palaeobiology of Vertebrates
Evolutionary trends in the major groups of vertebrates from both neontological and palaeontological viewpoints. The interpretation of palaeontological data and their applicability to our understanding of evolution, systematics and palaeoecology.
576
The Invertebrates
Collaborative research experience in invertebrate zoology, with emphasis on discovering, describing, and classifying diversity using zoological collections, systematic theory, and phylogenetic methods.
577
Mammalogy
A detailed examination of the evolution, morphology, physiology, ecology and behaviour of mammals.
581
Principles in Parasitism
An introduction to parasitism. Topics include: host-parasite interactions, life-cycles, evolution and societal concerns. There is a focus on current research into these topics.
595
Evolutionary Perspectives in Neurobiology
Explores form, function and performance of invertebrate and vertebrate neurons and nervous systems through examination of physical, biochemical, metabolic, (neuro)physiological and behavioural constraints and trade-offs.
597
Principles of Endocrinology
General and molecular aspects of endocrine physiology. Topics will include the mechanisms of hormone action (receptor occupancy and transduction of signal), current techniques in endocrinology, synthesis and release of hormones, and the functional role of different endocrine organs. Lectures will include examples from lower vertebrates and invertebrates to emphasize comparative aspects.
697
Advanced Topics in Comparative Endocrinology

